Source: SAICA IAC January 2026 — Paper 1 question (Mzansi).
Extracted for internal IAC diagnostic use. SAICA owns these examination documents.

Initial Assessment of Competence
Professional Paper 1
January 2026
Copyright, proprietary rights and permitted use
© The South African Institute of Chartered Accountants (SAICA). All rights reserved.
The SAICA Initial Assessment of Competence (IAC) questions, solutions and examiners comments (‘these
documents’) constitutes proprietary intellectual property and professional know-how of SAICA. It has been
developed and is maintained as part of SAICA’s mandate to uphold the quality, integrity, and high
professional standards of the Chartered Accountant profession, which underpin public confidence and the
value and attractiveness of SAICA membership and designation.
Access to, or use of, these documents does not confer any right, licence, or interest in the intellectual
property contained herein. Except where expressly permitted by SAICA in writing, no part of these
documents may be copied, reproduced, adapted, published, distributed, or used for commercial,
quasi-commercial, or third-party standard-setting purposes.
These documents may be used solely for legitimate educational, regulatory, or professional purposes, in a
manner that preserves their integrity, acknowledges SAICA as the owner and source, and does not
undermine SAICA’s role as custodian of professional standards or dilute the value associated with SAICA’s
membership and designation.
Any authorised access to or use of these documents is subject to, and must be exercised in accordance
with, SAICA’s Intellectual Property Management Policy, as amended from time to time.
Disclaimer clause: All names of persons, places and business entities mentioned in these documents are
fictitious and any resemblance to real persons, living or dead, places and business entities are purely
coincidental.
IAC January 2026 1 (of 9 pages) © SAICA 2026
Paper 1
PAPER 1 120 marks
Ignore value-added tax (VAT).
1 Background
Mzansi Trendz (Pty) Ltd (‘MT’) is a South African retailer. Incorporated in 1998, the company
operates 75 stores across South Africa. MT offers fashionable merchandise, often including
locally sourced fabrics and designs. The company caters for middle-to-upper-income customers
and does not offer credit facilities.
MT is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Inala Investments Ltd (‘Inala’), a diversified holding company
with investments in several retail companies. Jim Isaacs, the chair and chief executive officer of
Inala, is a former politician who gained significant wealth through strategic investments following
his departure from public office.
All Inala Group companies are audited by Sentinal & Associates Registered Auditors (‘Sentinal’),
prepare their annual financial statements in accordance with IFRS® Accounting Standards and
have 31 December financial year ends.
On 1 October 2019, Inala acquired MT, paying R300 million for a 100% controlling stake. The only
equity balances in MT’s financial statements were share capital and retained earnings amounting
to R253 million. All MT assets and liabilities were fairly valued at the date of acquisition, except
for owner-occupied land that had been purchased at a cost of R40 million. On 1 October 2019,
the land’s fair value was R46 million. The fair value of the land as at 31 December 2024 was
R43 million. The land was subsequently sold during the financial year ended 31 December 2025
(FY2025), and MT recognised a profit of R3,25 million on the sale in its separate financial
statements. As at 31 December 2025, the goodwill recognised on MT’s acquisition had an
accumulated impairment balance of R19 million.
The audits of the Inala group companies for FY2025 are currently in progress. All the auditor’s
reports must be issued by 25 March 2026.
The information that follows pertains to the audit of the annual financial statements of MT for
FY2025, which has been prepared using the going concern basis of accounting. The audit
engagement partner has approved a materiality figure for auditing MT’s 2025 annual financial
statements of R3 million.
IAC January 2026 2 (of 9 pages) © SAICA 2026
Paper 1
2 Understanding the inventory account balance
Inventory is MT’s largest asset. For financial reporting purposes, inventory is measured using the
first-in, first-out method at the lower of cost and net realisable value (NRV).
Inventory balances at the respective financial year ends comprised the following:
FY2025 FY2024
R’000 R’000
Merchandise on hand 137 260 123 317
Merchandise at sea 23 900 21 731
Inventory obsolescence allowance (write down to NRV) (10 951) (13 025)
150 209 132 023
Merchandise at sea is inventory in transit from several of the company’s suppliers. This inventory
is shipped free on board.
Sales of merchandise during FY2025 amounted to R501 million compared to R554 million in the
previous financial year, yielding a gross margin of 25% (FY2024: 33%).
Due to the fast-changing nature of fashion, MT regularly marks its merchandise down to clear out
slow-moving items and make way for new collections (as reflected in the inventory obsolescence
allowance).
MT operates a central distribution centre in Johannesburg where all merchandise is received and
inspected. It is then distributed to individual stores. Lead times between dispatch from the
Johannesburg distribution centre and arrival at the stores vary from one to five days. The company
uses an integrated computerised perpetual inventory management system, which can track
inventory levels, cost prices and selling prices in real-time.
At year end, a physical inventory count is conducted at the distribution centre and stores to verify
the accuracy of the perpetual inventory records. Differences between the quantities of inventory
according to the company’s perpetual inventory records and those counted were identified and
resulted in a net inventory write-down of R823 390 being recognised by MT (i.e., reflected in the
year-end inventory figures). Management approved this adjustment as it identified a risk of
inventory shortages in an environment where staff are demotivated by having to work long hours
and not being awarded salary increases or bonuses in recent years.
MT sources its merchandise from a mix of local and international suppliers. During FY2025,
Watkins Shoe Manufacturers Ltd renegotiated its contract with MT to supply shoes on
consignment, with amounts payable to the supplier now due at the end of the month in which the
sale took place (i.e., extended credit is no longer provided). Consignment stock is inventory held
by one party (the consignee) but owned by another party (the consignor) until it is sold to a
customer.
The returns of previously sold merchandise to customers of MT have also increased from prior
years. In total, during FY2025, merchandise costing approximately R20 million was returned by
customers for a variety of reasons, including because of defects in the merchandise.
IAC January 2026 3 (of 9 pages) © SAICA 2026
Paper 1
3 Systems description for the markdown of merchandise selling prices
The effective management of merchandise is vital to prevent financial losses due to inventory
obsolescence. MT implemented a system to proactively mark down the selling prices of slow-
moving merchandise a few years ago. Two types of discounts are applied to merchandise:
promotional discounts (applied to improve sales for items that are still in season) and clearance
sale discounts (applied to clear out end-of-season items). The following is an outline of this
system:
1 Once merchandise is delivered by a supplier, and the goods received note (GRN) is
generated, a copy of the GRN is emailed to the merchandise manager, Paul Potgieter.
2 For each merchandise item (e.g. ‘long sleeve fit & flare knitwear dress’) identified by a
unique number on the GRN, Paul performs the following on the inventory management
system:
2.1 Reviews and, if necessary, amends the markup percentage (on cost) for the
merchandise item;
2.2 Captures the budgeted unit sales of the merchandise item by month, based on
information given to him by the sales director; and
2.3 Reviews and, if necessary, amends the start date of the final clearance sale of the
merchandise item.
3 Once the start date of the final clearance sale of the merchandise item (as captured in step
2.3) arrives, the inventory management system automatically applies a fixed 50% clearance
sale discount on the normal selling price to the merchandise item. This is implemented
immediately at all stores.
4 Each month Sarah Smith, the merchandise director, extracts a report from the inventory
management system for merchandise items where the total actual unit sales are lower than
the total budgeted unit sales and imports this report into Excel. For each item on the
spreadsheet, she captures the proposed promotional discount percentage as well as the
start and end date for which the discount is to apply. The discounts may be implemented
for short periods of time (where sales are marginally behind those anticipated) or for
extended periods (where sales are lagging significantly).
5 A printout of this spreadsheet is discussed at the monthly executive management committee
(Exco) meetings. After making the necessary revisions, the Exco approves the discount
arrangement to be applied to underperforming merchandise lines.
6 Using decisions made at the Exco, the merchandise records administrator, Debra Dube,
captures the following details on the inventory management system for all MT stores:
6.1 Merchandise item code;
6.2 Approved promotional discount percentage (on normal selling price);
6.3 Start date of the discount; and
6.4 End date of the discount.
This system has served the needs of MT well. Even though not documented in the description
above, strong information processing controls have been incorporated into the system to ensure
the integrity of the data captured and processed. MT has also implemented strong general IT
controls, including those restricting access only to authorised individuals.
IAC January 2026 4 (of 9 pages) © SAICA 2026
Paper 1
4 Audit of inventory write-down to NRV
The audit team from Sentinal has commenced its audit work on the inventory account balance as
at 31 December 2025. Audit procedures have been performed on the write-down to NRV and the
following findings were extracted from working paper INV-104:
Audit procedure Findings
Enquire from the chief financial officer (CFO)
about the method used to compute the
inventory obsolescence allowance.
The CFO explained that the inventory
obsolescence allowance was computed as
follows:
• The NRV for all inventory on hand that had
a final clearance sale start date before
31 December 2025 was determined as
50% of the selling price; and
• The NRV for all other inventory items that
are still in season but remain marked down
at 31 December 2025 because sales are
lagging, was determined by applying the
approved promotional discount % to the
item’s normal selling price.
The obsolescence allowance was computed
as the difference between cost and NRV for
those inventory items where the item cost
exceeded the item’s NRV.
Compare the method used to compute the
obsolescence allowance in the current year
with the one that was used in the previous
financial year.
Done – the method used in FY2025 was
consistent with that used in FY2024.
Obtain the detailed workings supporting the
allowance.
Done – filed as working paper INV-106.1
Agree, by inspection, the allowance as at
31 December 2025 per the workings to the
balance on the ‘inventory obsolescence’
account in the general ledger/trial balance.
Done – no exceptions found.
Test the operating effectiveness of the direct
(key) controls in the system for inventory
markdowns.
Done – the system for the markdown of
merchandise selling prices (incl. the
information processing controls) was found to
be operating effectively during FY2025.
Request that management include reference
to the reasonableness of the inventory
obsolescence amount in management’s
written representation letter.
Done – will be filed once the audit process
concludes and before the auditor’s report is
issued.
As the data from MT’s inventory management system is compatible with the generalised audit
software used by Sentinal, the audit team intends to use this software to improve the efficiency
and effectiveness of the audit.
1 Not included as part of the scenario.
IAC January 2026 5 (of 9 pages) © SAICA 2026
Paper 1
5 Financing arrangement – loan from XYZ Bank
MT relies on a substantial loan facility from a major South African bank, XYZ Bank. To secure this
facility, MT agreed to pledge R50 million of its inventory held in the Johannesburg distribution
centre as collateral for the loan. MT remains fully obligated for the outstanding loan balance
(interest plus principal), irrespective of the collateral pledged to XYZ Bank.
A total loan amount of R24 million was provided to MT on 1 February 2024. A fixed interest rate
of 11,5% per annum, compounded annually, is payable on the loan.
The loan agreement between MT and XYZ Bank contains the following key covenants:
1 MT is required to maintain a –
• minimum current ratio of 1,5:1,
• maximum debt-to-equity ratio of 2:1, and
• minimum annual earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation
(EBITDA) of R15 million.
2 A breach of any of the above constitutes a default.
3 In the event of a default, XYZ Bank has the right to demand immediate repayment of the
outstanding loan balance and, if not repaid, enforce the inventory collateral pledged.
MT was able to maintain the loan agreement covenant ratios for a period, but during FY2025 the
entity faced significant challenges, including increased competition from international retailers
establishing physical stores in South Africa and customers buying from online retailers. The
FY2025 revenue projections were not met and some of MT’s suppliers started to tighten their
credit terms and cancelled lines of credit. This negatively impacted the entity’s operating cash
flows, liquidity and profitability. When finalising the FY2025 results as at 31 December 2025, the
company’s current ratio was calculated to be 1,2:1. EBITDA for FY2025 came in below
R15 million, with the loss before tax provisionally calculated to be R1,5 million. This was the first
full-year loss incurred by MT.
Upon becoming aware of the breach of the debt covenant, XYZ Bank notified MT that a default
had occurred and demanded immediate repayment of the outstanding loan. MT was unable to
repay the outstanding loan amount due to a lack of available cash on hand given company
performance and increased inventory balances.
Accordingly, XYZ Bank formalised its right to claim the collateral pledged as security for the loan
agreement, and initiated steps to obtain legal possession of the inventory in the distribution centre.
XYZ Bank agreed to allow MT to continue to sell the inventory from its premises. On the
subsequent sale of the pledged inventory, all amounts would be used to settle the loan obligation.
In the event that the proceeds from these sales are insufficient to cover the outstanding loan
balance, MT remains obligated for repaying any outstanding amounts to XYZ Bank. As at
31 December 2025, MT had not sold any of the pledged inventory relating to the outstanding loan
balance. MT commenced sales of pledged inventory in January 2026 and started repaying the
loan balance from these sales proceeds.
IAC January 2026 6 (of 9 pages) © SAICA 2026
Paper 1
In order to settle XYZ Bank’s outstanding loan balance and overdue interest, MT needed to sell
the pledged inventory urgently. Therefore the inventory would have to be sold at a significant
discount. MT estimated that it would take two to three months to settle the debt with XYZ Bank.
Sarah established that the inventory held at the distribution centre had a carrying value of
R65 million. She asserted that the R50 million that forms part of the pledged inventory to XYZ
Bank should, in her opinion, be derecognised in the financial statements at year end and the
balance thereof be used to offset the carrying amount of the loan reflected as at
31 December 2025.
6 Going concern assessment
The audit team from Sentinal has identified the risk of the going concern basis of accounting being
incorrectly applied in the 2025 financial statements of MT as ‘high’.
Audit work was undertaken on the cash flow and profit forecasts prepared by the management of
MT for FY2026. Based on these forecasts, which the audit team found reasonable, the audit team
concluded that the company’s liquidity and profitability challenges would persist. When the audit
team discussed this conclusion with the management of MT, management indicated that it was
in the process of formulating an action plan to ensure that MT can continue operating as a going
concern. This action plan involves the following:
• Closing five unprofitable stores;
• Reducing marketing expenditures in FY2026 by R1 million per month (or R12 million in
total), compared to the expenditures in FY2025; and
• Securing loan financing of R75 million from Inala, who was in the process of raising funds
from the sale of some of its shares in MT to the African Industrial Development Bank (‘AID’).
AID is a government-owned bank that invests in businesses and promotes economic
development in South Africa and in the rest of Africa.
In January 2026 management presented the audit team with revised forecasts incorporating the
effects of this action plan. Management confirmed that MT could trade profitably and that the
liquidity challenges could be overcome.
Having performed further audit procedures on the action plan, the audit team concluded that
material uncertainty exists that may cast significant doubt on MT’s ability to continue as a going
concern. With no other material uncorrected misstatements having been identified or suspected,
the audit team is considering the modifications required to the auditor’s report on MT’s annual
financial statements for FY2025.
7 Arrangement with AID
Jim used his connections with several members of AID’s Investment Committee to persuade them
to visit his private game farm for a weekend. There he persuaded the AID Investment Committee
members to invest in MT and save the jobs of MT’s close to 500 employees.
IAC January 2026 7 (of 9 pages) © SAICA 2026
Paper 1
The details of the arrangement between Inala and AID were finalised during December 2025. The
following is an extract of the agreement that was signed by the AID and Inala representatives.
Parties
This agreement is between Inala (herein referred to as the ‘Investee’) and AID (herein referred
to as the ‘Investor’).
Undertaking
Both parties undertake to enter into this agreement on the following attached terms and
conditions.
Sale of equity interest
The Investor will acquire a 45% equity stake in MT, Inala’s subsidiary. Along with the 45% equity
stake, the Investor is entitled to appoint three out of the five directors on the board of MT.
Payment arrangement
The Investor undertakes to provide the Investee with an amount of R90 million (hereinafter
referred to as ‘the cash amount’). The cash amount is payable to the Investee in three equal
tranches of R30 million. The first tranche will be payable to the Investee on 1 January 2026.
The two remaining tranches will be payable to the Investee on 1 March 2026 and 1 June 2026.
Other terms
No amounts are repayable to the Investor. MT however anticipates paying an annual ordinary
dividend of R9 million, commencing in FY2026, to ordinary shareholders, subject to business
performance.
The parties agree that the time value of money as it relates to the tranches that AID will pay over
to Inala may be ignored.
An actuary determined the following fair values relating to MT as at 1 January 2026:
Percentage holding Fair value
R’000
45% equity stake in MT 132 000
55% equity stake in MT 168 000
When it became aware of the details of the AID agreement with Inala, the People for Democracy
Party (PDP), a major opposition party in the South African government, strongly criticised this
agreement in the media. The PDP argued that the agreement was only concluded because Jim
used his political connections, and that there was no commercial logic to the transaction. The
PDP felt that money was being diverted from other more worthy projects to the detriment of the
people of South Africa.
Upon reading the media reports, the chair of AID’s accounting authority (the public sector’s
equivalent to a board of directors) called for a meeting to formulate an action plan to deal with the
matter proactively.
IAC January 2026 8 (of 9 pages) © SAICA 2026
Paper 1
8 Impact of AID on Inala’s investment in MT
The arrangement with AID was approved by Inala’s board of directors during December 2025.
AID thereafter appointed two non-executive directors and the chief financial officer to the board
of MT. Therefore, AID became the controlling shareholder of MT.
8.1 Disposal of MT shares
The equity stake granted to AID triggered Inala’s disposal of 45% of its MT shares. Inala
recognised a profit of R6 million on the disposal of MT shares on 1 January 2026, being the date
on which all suspensive conditions of the agreement with AID were met.
8.2 Extracts from the MT financial statements
The following are extracts from the MT financial statements for FY2025. All amounts are correct.
Statement of changes in equity as at 31 December 2025
Share capital Retained earnings FVOCI reserve
R’000 R’000 R’000
100 000 178 000 See note 1
Note 1
This reserve relates to a listed bond that was issued by Louw Investments. MT purchased the
bond on 1 January 2023 for an amount of R9,5 million, which was also its fair value.
Other details pertaining to the bond are as follows:
Description Details
Principal amount R9,5 million
Term 5 years
Maturity amount R10,5 million
Coupon, paid annually on 31 December R896 000
MT correctly classified the bond as being subsequently measured at fair value through other
comprehensive income (FVOCI) in accordance with IFRS 9 Financial Instruments,
paragraph 4.1.2A.
On 31 December 2024 and 31 December 2025, the bond's fair value was R8,4 million and
R8,9 million, respectively.
IAC January 2026 9 (of 9 pages) © SAICA 2026
Paper 1
Since the original recognition of the bond, it was established that there had been no significant
increase in credit risk up to 31 December 2024 and 31 December 2025. The IFRS 9 expected
credit losses relating to the bond are as follows:
Expected credit losses as at 12-month expected
credit losses
Lifetime expected
credit losses
R’000 R’000
31 December 2024 612 1 670
31 December 2025 980 1 980
9 Additional information
• Ignore the time value of money with regard to the agreement with AID.
• MT accounts for all its property, plant and equipment at cost in accordance with IAS 16,
Property, Plant and Equipment.
• The Inala Group accounts for owner-occupied land using the revaluation model and uses
the cost model for all other items of property, plant and equipment in accordance with
IAS 16.
• There has been no changes to MT’s total issued share capital since 1 October 2016.
• As at 31 December 2025, the goodwill recognised on MT’s acquisition has over the years
been partially impaired by R19 million.
• All amounts are material, unless stated otherwise.
IAC January 2026 1 (of 1 page) © SAICA 2026
Paper 1 Part I required
INITIAL ASSESSMENT OF COMPETENCE, JANUARY 2026
PROFESSIONAL PAPER 1
This paper consists of one scenario and two required parts.
Answer each required part in a separate answer book.
PAPER 1 PART I – REQUIRED
Marks
Sub-
total Total
(a) Discuss the effect of the information provided in section 2 (Understanding
the inventory account balance) on the auditor’s assessment of the risk of
material misstatement for the inventory account balance in the FY2025
financial statements of MT.
Y4: Judgement and decision making
15
1 16
(b) Describe the key controls that MT should have implemented to ensure –
(i) the accuracy and completeness of data captured by Paul that
influence clearance sales; and
(ii) the accuracy and completeness of the promotional discount details
captured by Debra on the inventory management system.
X1: Communication skill – clarity of expression
10
8
1 19
(c) Formulate the additional substantive audit procedures that should be
performed by Sentinal to obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence
about the inventory obsolescence allowance balance as at
31 December 2025.
W1: Data analytics
9
1 10
(d) With regard to MT’s liquidity and profitability challenges (under section 6:
Going concern assessment) –
(i) describe the additional audit procedures that should be performed
by Sentinal on the action plan formulated by the management team
of MT; and
(ii) explain what modifications, if any, should be made to the auditor’s
report on MT’s FY2025 financial statements.
Z1: Business internal environment (for part (d)(i))
13
5
1 19
Total for part I 64
IAC January 2026 1 (of 1 page) © SAICA 2026
Paper 1 Part II required
INITIAL ASSESSMENT OF COMPETENCE JANUARY 2026
PROFESSIONAL PAPER 1
This paper consists of one scenario and two required parts.
Answer each required part in a separate answer book.
PAPER 1 PART II – REQUIRED
Marks
Sub-
total Total
(e) Based on IFRS® Accounting Standards, evaluate, with reasons, Sarah’s
statement regarding the treatment of pledged inventory and the loan from
XYZ Bank.
X1: Communication skill – logical argument
11
1 12
(f) Describe the steps that AID’s accounting authority should take following
the criticism expressed in the media with regard to the agreement AID
concluded with Inala.
Z2: Business external environment
9
1 10
(g) Prepare the journal entries that MT should process in its FY2025 separate
financial statements to account for the Louw Investments bond.
• Ignore tax.
• Do not provide journal narrations.
• Round all calculations to the nearest rand.
12
12
(h) Calculate the group profit or loss, if any, that Inala should recognise in its
consolidated financial statements relating to the disposal of the MT shares
on 1 January 2026.
• Ignore all tax with regard to the Louw Investments bond only.
• Ignore the time value of money with regard to the payment tranches
that AID will pay over to Inala.
• Round all calculations to the nearest rand.
22
22
Total for part II 56
TOTAL FOR PAPER 1 120
