Source: SAICA IAC January 2026 — Paper 3 Part I suggested solution (IR).
Extracted for internal IAC diagnostic use. SAICA owns these examination documents.

Initial Assessment of Competence
Professional Paper 3
January 2026
Copyright, proprietary rights and permitted use
© The South African Institute of Chartered Accountants (SAICA). All rights reserved.
The SAICA Initial Assessment of Competence (IAC) questions, solutions and examiners comments
(‘these documents’) constitutes proprietary intellectual property and professional know-how of SAICA.
It has been developed and is maintained as part of SAICA’s mandate to uphold the quality, integrity,
and high professional standards of the Chartered Accountant profession, which underpin public
confidence and the value and attractiveness of SAICA membership and designation.
Access to, or use of, these documents does not confer any right, licence, or interest in the intellectual
property contained herein. Except where expressly permitted by SAICA in writing, no part of these
documents may be copied, reproduced, adapted, published, distributed, or used for commercial,
quasi-commercial, or third-party standard-setting purposes.
These documents may be used solely for legitimate educational, regulatory, or professional purposes,
in a manner that preserves their integrity, acknowledges SAICA as the owner and source, and does not
undermine SAICA’s role as custodian of professional standards or dilute the value associated with
SAICA’s membership and designation.
Any authorised access to or use of these documents is subject to, and must be exercised in accordance
with, SAICA’s Intellectual Property Management Policy, as amended from time to time.
Disclaimer clause: All names of persons, places and business entities mentioned in these
documents are fictitious and any resemblance to real persons, living or dead, places and business
entities are purely coincidental.
IAC JANUARY 2026 SUGGESTED SOLUTION
PAPER 3 PART I

Part (a) Discuss the governance issues and ethical leadership concerns,
with reference to the principles and recommended practices of the
King IV Report on Corporate Governance, arising from the CEO’s
actions and behaviour in connection with the opening of the new
LC stores.
• Do not discuss the SAICA Code of Professional Conduct.
• Do not discuss compliance with the Companies Act.
Marks
Dominance of a single individual in strategic decision making/disregard for
board dissent (indicator)
Although the board expressed reservations, the CEO, Jordan Henderson,
proceeded unilaterally with the strategic shift and roll-out of 17 LC stores. It raises
concerns about the following principles:
Principle 8: The governing body should ensure that its arrangements for
delegation within its own structure promote independent judgment and assist with
the balance of power; however:
• Jordan’s unilateral action suggests a lack of collaboration between board
members. This reflects a potential lack of balance of power between the
board and executive management. 1
Principle 6: The governing body should serve as the focal point and custodian of
corporate governance in the organisation.
• The governing body should ensure that its composition supports effective
governance, but board resistance seems to be overridden by the CEO, and
the decision to proceed with the LC store rollout despite board reservations
suggests an erosion of board authority and collective decision-making.(also
evidenced by Jordan leading most board meetings – the role of a chair, which
he is not).
1
Principle 10 states that the governing body should ensure that delegation to
management contributes to role clarity and effective exercise of authority and
responsibilities.
• In this case, the CEO’s decision to act independently, despite board
resistance, suggests that the delegation framework may not be functioning
effectively.
• There appears to be a breakdown in accountability and a lack of clarity
regarding the limits of executive authority.
1
1
Strategic misalignment and risk management oversight (indicator)
The launch of a new retail concept targeted at a different market segment is a
significant strategic risk. The decision appears to have been driven by the CEO’s
personal vision, rather than a thoroughly vetted and board-approved strategic plan.
This raises concerns about the following principles:
Principle 11 states that the governing body should govern risk in a way that
supports the organisation in setting and achieving its strategic objectives.
• Risk governance, the risk appetite and tolerance of such a strategic shift
appear to have been ignored by the CEO, which is concerning, particularly
as these stores are not profitable and are underperforming. 1
Principle 4 states that the governing body should appreciate that the
organisation’s core purpose and its risks and opportunities, strategy, business
model, performance and sustainable development are all inseparable elements of
the value creation process.
• Strategy and performance While IR’s stated strategy is to ‘maintain and
grow market share among low-income South African customers’, the CEO
has continued to open new stores aimed at middle-income customers,
despite reservations from the board. These LC stores mark a significant
shift from IR’s established discount model, yet there is no indication that
IAC JANUARY 2026 SUGGESTED SOLUTION
PAPER 3 PART I

the board formally revised the company’s strategy. This principle is
undermined, which requires the governing body to approve and oversee
the implementation of the strategy.
1
Possible undue influence due to family ties (indicator)
Jordan is the son of Alvin Henderson (founder and chair of the board), which raises
concerns about the following principles:
Principle 7 emphasises the importance of independence for effective governance.
• As the CEO is the son of the chair and founder, his close personal ties with the
board’s leadership raise concerns about his objectivity and potential influence
over board decisions. This may contribute to unbalanced power dynamics and
reduce the board’s ability to exercise independent oversight.
1
Misleading stakeholder communication (indicator)
The CEO’s selective disclosure to stakeholders, particularly the presentation of
once-off revenue as if it were indicative of ongoing performance, and portraying
overly optimistic results, raises serious concerns regarding the ethical and
effective leadership expected of the board under Principle 1 of King IV. 1
The following characteristics of ethical and effective leadership are not displayed:
Integrity requires that directors be straightforward and honest.
• A significant portion of revenue in the latest quarter came from once-off, non-
recurring transactions, such as bulk purchases and corporate orders, rather
than from sustained customer activity. Jordan’s positive portrayal of this
revenue as evidence of sustainable demand is misleading, especially
considering pressure from the CEO to ‘prematurely’ recognise revenue. It
could be perceived that the CEO is not being straightforward and honest. 1
Integrity requires that board members avoid conflicts of interest.
• In Jordan’s case, several potential conflicts exist. These include conflicts
between his bonus, his career progression and the broader sustainability of
the company, particularly as the new LC stores may continue to operate at a
loss, placing the business under significant financial strain.
OR
• Jordan may face conflict of interest due to his family relationship with the chair
of the board and company founder, who is also his father.
1
Jordan’s desire to establish a reputation as an innovative CEO appears to
influence how he reports performance. Ethical leadership demands a focus on
organisational purpose and values, not personal ambition. 1
Accountability
• Rather than accepting the failure of the lifestyle store concept or recalibrating
the strategy, Jordan frames it as a ‘visionary step’ and avoids accountability.
His view that flexibility in the interpretation of revenue recognition policies is
not only permissible but sometimes necessary in periods of commercial
transformation and strategic repositioning, suggests a strategic
misrepresentation, not accountability and transparency.
1
Competence
• His disregard of the CFO’s concerns about the assumptions and revenue
recognition practices, reflects poor judgement. His Not asking for expert advice
• may explain a strong focus on narrative, but ethical leadership requires
deference to expertise in areas beyond one’s own training/knowledge.
1
Responsibility
• Jordan sidelines concerns from the CFO and imposes a reporting approach
that lacks nuance and balance, despite internal discomfort. This creates a
culture where ethical concerns are not escalated, and dissent is discouraged.
1
IAC JANUARY 2026 SUGGESTED SOLUTION
PAPER 3 PART I

Principle 16: In the execution of its governance role and responsibilities, the
governing body should adopt a stakeholder-inclusive approach that balances the
needs, interests and expectations of material stakeholders in the best interests of
the organisation over time.
• Jordan highlighted selective, favourable metrics while failing to disclose key
operational challenges. This approach compromises the integrity of
stakeholder communication, which should be transparent, objective and
provide a fair reflection of the organisation’s performance. 1
Pressure to manipulate financial reporting and questionable revenue
recognition practices (indicator)
The CEO insisted that the CFO recognise the revenue at the point of order
confirmation to ‘reflect demand strength’ to the shareholders and investors. The
CFO also voiced her concerns about inconsistencies in the application of revenue
recognition policies across stores and raised the following concerns:
Principle 15: Responsible disclosure provides that the governing body should
ensure that the organisation’s reports and other disclosures enable stakeholders
to make informed assessments of its performance.
• The quarterly results and investor presentations emphasised selective positive
data (revenue growth, engagement in successful stores) while omitting key
operational failures and continued losses.
1
Principle 15 of King IV requires the board to ensure that assurance services and
financial reporting are performed with competence and integrity, and in
compliance with applicable standards.
• Jordan justified the early revenue recognition by citing ‘flexibility’ in applying
IFRS 15 due to the company’s strategic repositioning. However, this
reflects a misuse of professional judgement, as it prioritises short-term
strategic objectives over the faithful application of the accounting standard. 1
Dismissal of concerns of the CFO (indicator)
Jordan’s conduct undermines ethical leadership by dismissing concerns raised by
the CFO. She flagged inconsistent revenue recognition and once-off transactions
used to boost quarterly results, raising the following concerns:
Principle 2: Organisational ethics provides that the governing body should
govern the ethics in a way that supports an ethical culture.
• Rather than encouraging open discussion, Jordan dismissed the finance
team and CFO's concerns as overly pessimistic. His control over public
communications and refusal to acknowledge dissent have fostered a culture
where ethical concerns are ignored. 1
The CEO’s reference to their concerns as a ‘pessimism bias’ reflects a leadership
tone that undermines the importance of employees' and other directors'
views and silences professional judgment.
1
Available 19
Maximum 12
Total for part (a) 12
IAC JANUARY 2026 SUGGESTED SOLUTION
PAPER 3 PART I

Part (b) Critically evaluate the strategic considerations that influenced IR’s
decision to invest in the LC stores.
• Ignore the governance-related matters that may have affected
the decision to invest in the LC stores.
Marks
Alignment with current strategy
IR’s product offering for the new concept stores conflicts with the company’s
core strategic objective of market share growth in the low-income South African
customer market.
1
Furthermore, the lack of alignment between the two strategies would have
negatively impacted the company’s ability to reshape the concept store strategy to
align with its own.
1
The decision to enter the middle-LSM market afforded IR the opportunity to grow
company profits and increase performance incentives for directors.
1
There does not appear to have been a clear strategic reason for the investment
in the concept stores other than it being the CEO’s idea from his trip to China. Thus,
the concept was not designed to create value for the company as it was not linked
to any objectives.
1
The geographic market entered was similar to the company’s existing
operations, which would have decreased the time needed for the company to fully
understand the new market. This should have improved the chances of success of
the project.
1
The market (being a different LSM group) offered IR the opportunity to spread its
risk through (some) diversification
1
IR’s existing market was growing and it may have been better for the company to
rather place more resources in this part of the business than in the new
concept stores.
1
Management
Since the CEO made this expansion decision unilaterally, it seems as though the
rest of the management did not fully buy into this decision, with many concerns
raised but dismissed, which would decrease their commitment to the project and
the likelihood of its success
1
IR lacked the expertise and experience with the concept stores, which would make
it difficult for the company to penetrate this new market. IR would have been better
served expanding on its already serviced market to try to unlock further value for
shareholders. (Lack of strategic experience)
1
IR’s lack of management experience in the higher-LSM markets could impact the
company’s ability to effectively compete against well-established business in the
sector like Spozena Retailers and Kingsworth. (Lack of operational experience)
1
The impact on existing management bandwidth and the potential that the launch
of this new project could distract from the core operations of the organisation
should have been considered.
1
Training required for the difference in product line and target customer segment
of the staff from the discount stores allocated to the new LC stores does not seem
to have been considered.
1
Suppliers, distribution and product demand
IR would probably not be able to use its strong bargaining power with its
existing suppliers (economies of scale) as the new concept stores required
different suppliers. This would increase prices for products in a market where
customers were becoming more price conscious. This could further have been
exacerbated by the expanded product ranges which IR was not used to selling.
(Inadequate supply chains)
1
IAC JANUARY 2026 SUGGESTED SOLUTION
PAPER 3 PART I

New suppliers would have to be used and would have needed to adapt their
product offerings to be able to supply IR, which would increase the likelihood that
poor quality products could be received by the company, with a resultant impact
on sales.
1
The company’s entire value chain (not just supply chain) seems inadequate
for the shift to a new market, as evidenced by
• the inefficiencies in distribution and warehousing’
• marketing aimed at low margin products (food) when the budget was driven by
a sales mix weighted towards the higher margin products (clothing)
1
The continued devaluation of the rand prior to July 2024, seemed to indicate that
it was poor decision to shift focus into a market that relied on imported products.
This would have made the success of the concept more difficult as it would lead to
products becoming more expensive.
1
As a consequence of high interest rates and rising electricity and medical costs,
which significantly reduced consumers' disposable income, IR may not have had
much choice but to consider another LSM market as its current market may be very
heavily influenced by the economic environment in South Africa.
1
The suitability of diversifying into a middle-LSM customer profile given the
tough economic conditions and pressure on disposable income experienced in
2024, would likely have been considered.
1
As the existing customer base was not the target for the new strategy, IR
would be unable to rely on its existing customers to help support the idea and
improve demand for its new products.
1
The perception of the market when it comes to IR would likely have impacted
customers’ willingness to purchase premium products from a company known for
producing discount products. Thus, the company could receive a smaller sales
market due to customers unwillingness to purchase products from the company.
(Lack of brand recognition/confusion)
1
The implementation of loyalty programs/cards could improve their chances of
gaining market share in a market that values loyalty points.
1
Competitors
A highly competitive marketplace would have required IR to provide a unique
offering to try to capture market share from established competitors. However, the
company provided similar products to that of its competitors with no major strategic
shift from normal operations. This would have impacted the company’s ability to
capture market share.
1
The possibility of a negative impact on the company as a result of entering into a
market with a significant number of competitors and a shrinking consumer
market for these types of products.
1
IAC JANUARY 2026 SUGGESTED SOLUTION
PAPER 3 PART I

Other
The rollout of the LC stores would require a significant capital injection. This
would have increased financial pressure on IR to demonstrate improved financial
performance from the new stores. Given the uncertainty surrounding the new
concept, the decision to undertake such a large capital investment may have
exposed the company to heightened financial risk if the strategy failed to generate
the expected returns.
1
Available 24
Maximum 14
Z1 – Business internal environment
(Mark awarded if candidates recognised the shift in strategy by the company
(i.e. lower LSM market and new strategy))
1
Z2 – Business external environment
(Mark awarded if candidates recognised any issue relating to the external
business environment,
e,g. competition, devaluation of the rand, state of the SA economy)
1
Total for part (b) 16
IAC JANUARY 2026 SUGGESTED SOLUTION
PAPER 3 PART I

Part (c) Prepare a memorandum addressed to the board of directors. In the
memorandum, incorporate insights across all LC stores but only
include calculations for Group B stores. The memorandum should
cover the following:
(i) An evaluation of why the actual net profit of the LC stores
differs significantly from the budgeted profit.
• Focus only on the sales mix, market size and market
share variances. (calculations 9; discussion 11)
Marks
Memorandum format
Calculations
() = adverse and + = favourable Amount
Group B R’000
Sales mix variance: Food [ 105 000 (½) -
(150 000*50%(½))] *30% (½)
9 000 1½
Sales mix variance: Clothing [45 000(½) -
(150 000*50%)](½) *46% (½) (13 800) 1½
Total mix variance (4 800) 1C
Weighted budgeted GP (50%*30%) + (50%*46%) 38% 1
Market size variance
(800(½) - 1 000(½)) *20% (½) *38% (½ C) (15 200) 2
Market share variance
Actual market share (150 000 / 800 000) (1)
800 000(½)* (18.75%(½ C) - 20%(½)) *38%(½ C)
18.75%
(3 800)
1
2
Total 10
1 Sales mix variance
One of the drivers of underperformance by the LC stores is the unfavourable sales
mix variance across the three groups.
1
The LC store was launched with a planned focus on clothing, which has a higher
margin between the categories making up the bulk of sales.
1
The food category, which has a lower margin, made up the bulk of actual sales,
significantly diluting gross profit to deliver the goods.
1
In all the regions (Group A (7 200), Group B (4 800) and Group C (6 300), food
performed better in terms of volume, but it could not compensate for the profit lost
by underperforming clothing sales.
This clothing sales variance contributed to reduction in profit by R13 800 000.
1
The company misread customer preferences. For concept store customers,
essential food items are prioritised over lifestyle goods.
The CEO failed to localise the product mix, assuming uniform middle-LSM demand
across provinces.
1
2 Market size variance
The actual market shrank across all regions: Group A (R8 360 000) Group B
(R15 200 000) and Group C (R14 000 000).
The overall impact of this variance on profit was a reduction (R37 600 000).
1
Group B’s decline was quite big, reflecting strategic overestimation of the
opportunity size and lack of sensitivity to local markets.
1
The macro-economic environment in South Africa – higher interest rates, weak
rand, high electricity costs and health costs – put pressure on middle-income
customers, resulting in a decline in market size.
1
While the economic contraction was uncontrollable,
it can and should have been monitored and anticipated.
2
IAC JANUARY 2026 SUGGESTED SOLUTION
PAPER 3 PART I

3 Market share variance
The market share performance was inconsistent across regions Group A had a
positive contribution to profit of R8 360 000, while Group B had negative impact on
profit (R3 800 000) and Group C positively impacted profit by R3 500 000.
1
Group A benefited from brand strength, and location advantage in more
economically resilient provinces.
1
Group B most likely lost market share to better established competitors who have
a better understanding of the customers.
1
Where performance was bad, could be due to increased competition from low-cost
online retailers.
1
Group C’s performance was good in capturing the larger share of a smaller market. 1
Discussion: Available 15
Maximum 11
Calculations: Available 10
Maximum 9
Total for part (c)(i) 20
Part (c) Prepare a memorandum addressed to the board of directors. In the
memorandum, incorporate insights across all LC stores but only
include calculations for Group B stores. The memorandum should
cover the following:
(ii) An assessment of the CEO’s theory that the store profitability
could be improved by ‘right-sizing’ store formats to better
align with local market conditions.
• Use break-even analysis, contribution margin and unit
economics (revenue and cost per m2) to support your
answer. (discussion 9; calculations 5)
Marks
Group A stores are highly productive, achieving a very strong revenue of
R300 000/m2 and a cost per m2 of R287 480. The format is appropriately sized and
costed for demand.
1
Its costs relative to footprint appear under control. 1
The break-even revenue is below actual revenue of R300 million, and it has a
healthy contribution margin ratio of 29%.
1
Group B – 1800 m2
The stores are oversized relative to the revenue they make. R27 778 per m2 is
significantly low and does not cover its costs (R28 563 per m2).
This indicates inefficiencies in space utilisation and cost structure. Consideration
should be given to resizing or re-configuring Group B stores.
1
1
The contribution margin of 22% makes it viable but borderline as actual sales
(R150 million) is below break-even revenue.
1
Group C
This group only contributes 7%, and these stores do not cover even basic costs.
Without drastic resizing or repositioning, they are unsustainable.
1
Their break-even revenue of R252 609 000 far exceeds is actual revenue of
R70 million.
1
Consideration should be given to reconsidering or exiting Group C’s current format. 1
General
The analysis somewhat confirms the CEO’s view that store formats must be
tailored to local conditions, including demographics, spending power and demand
mix.
1P
While resizing may improve cost efficiency, it cannot resolve structural demand
weaknesses where contribution margins remain insufficient (e.g. Group C).
1
IAC JANUARY 2026 SUGGESTED SOLUTION
PAPER 3 PART I

Furthermore, reducing store size may weaken economies of scale and supplier
bargaining power.
1
Performance differences across regions suggest that local demand conditions,
rather than store footprint alone, are the primary drivers of profitability.
1
Calculations
Variable costs
108 000 + (46 240*20%) 117 248 1
Contribution ratio
(150 000 - 117 248)/150 000 21,83% 1C
Fixed cost
(46 240*80%) 36 992 ½
Break-even revenue
36 992 / 21,83% 169 455 ½C
Revenue per m2
(150 000 000/3)/1 800 27 778 1
Cost per m2
((108 000 000+ 46 240 000)/3)/1 800 28 563 1
Discussion: Available 13
Maximum 9
Calculations : Available 5
Maximum 5
Total for part (c)(ii) 14
X1: Communication skill – presentation and layout
(Mark awarded if candidates presented their answer in a memorandum format)
1
Y4: Judgement and decision making
(Mark awarded if candidates showed clear insight into the causes of
underperformance and feasible next steps)
1
Total for part (c) 36
IAC JANUARY 2026 SUGGESTED SOLUTION
PAPER 3 PART I

Part (d) Evaluate the CEO’s proposal to close all stores in group C by –
(i) using relevant costing principles to calculate the impact on
the performance of IR in FY2026;
• Assume that the 2025 results are likely to be typical of
the future performance in 2026.
Marks
Incremental
effect
R'000
Gross profit (156 100 - 147 000) (9 100) 0.5
Store operating cost (W1) 11 822
Logistics (59 800 - 51 750) 8 050 1
Logistics penalty (900) 0.5
Marketing and brand investment
(0,15*40 040)
6 006 1
External marketing cost - sunk cost 0 0.5
Head office - allocated cost 0 0.5
Finance cost 0 0.5
15 878
Workings 1
Store operating costs R'000
Variable cost - avoidable (21 580*20%) 4 316 1
Total salaries saved 6 606
Saving on salaries (114*32) + (120*28) + (180*10) 8 808 1.5
Retrenchment cost (8 808/12) * 3 (2 202) 1
Saving on rental (50*12*9) 5 400 1
Rental penalty
Pay penalty (500 000*9) = 4 500
Continue rental and sublet (42 000*9*12) = 4 536
Therefore, choose to cancel the lease contracts because the
penalty (4500) is less than the cost of continuing the rental and
subletting (4536).
(4 500)
1
1
1
11 822
Available 12
Maximum 12
Total for part (d)(i) 12
Part (d) Evaluate the CEO’s proposal to close all stores in group C by –
(ii) critically discussing the impact on the company and its
internal stakeholders.
• Assume that the 2025 results are likely to be typical of
the future performance in 2026.
Marks
Company – positive
The decision to close the nine Group C stores seems to be a sound financial
choice. This will result in the company being able to generate a greater profit from
reduced operating expenses.
Furthermore, some relevant items would be once-off (rental penalty, retrenchment
cost) which will have an effect on future profits.
1
1
IAC JANUARY 2026 SUGGESTED SOLUTION
PAPER 3 PART I

The closure of nine Group C stores represents more than half of the total number
of stores. This would also be expected to result in a cost saving of the head office
costs at a company level.
1
The closure of the stores will afford the company more time to focus on the better
performing group of stores, which may make the company more competitive in
these areas.
1
Fewer concept stores will likely improve the quality of product and service offerings
by management as management will then be able to focus on a few stores in a few
areas. This could result in more sales in areas where the company will still be
operating.
1
Company – negative
Although Group C is the worst performing segment concept stores group, closure
of the stores in these areas may affect the company’s ability to come back and
reopen stores in the area, resulting in a loss of future market share.
1
Furthermore, the new concept stores project has only been in operation for one
year. Thus there is still time for the situation to improve. Closing the stores now in
specific areas does not seem to make business sense and will lead to a loss of the
company to take advantage of the market in these areas.
1
The steps taken by the company to close all stores in Group C seems to be drastic
and thus may have a negative reputational effect on the company. It may thus
result in a loss of market share from customers in other areas.
1
Group C earns a positive contribution margin. Because of the positive contribution
margin, improvement of marketing and distribution (for which inefficiencies have
been noted) and a focus on control of head office costs might render greater results
for the company as a whole.
1
Internal stakeholders
The closure of the Group C stores would likely negatively affect existing employees
at other locations as these employees may leave the employ of the company,
resulting in operational delays as the company seeks to find replacement
employees.
1
Managers of the outlets might be moved back to other outlets. Having to move
again might affect their productivity, drive, and motivation.
1
The retrenchment of employees may expose the company to potential labour
disputes or legal action if the retrenchment process is perceived as unfair or
procedurally flawed. This could result in additional costs or management time
diversion.
1
The retrenchment of the employees in the nine stores could lead to lowered
employee morale which could affect productivity.
1
The executive team will benefit also as they may get performance-based bonuses
as a result of improved financial results.
1
Available 14
Maximum 5
Total for part (d)(ii) 5
Total for part (d) 17
TOTAL FOR PART I 81
