Source: SAICA IAC June 2026 — Paper 1 question (Inpahla).
Extracted for internal IAC diagnostic use. SAICA owns these examination documents.

IAC June 2026 1 (of 5) © SAICA 2026
Paper 1
PAPER 1 120 marks
1 Background
Inpahla SOC Ltd (‘Inpahla’) is a wholly state-owned entity operating in the freight and logistics
industry that delivers goods throughout South Africa. Inpahla was first formed in 1860 and is
incorporated as a company in terms of the Companies Act with a financial year end of
31 March. Inpahla is subject to taxation in terms of the Income Tax Act, and none of the
exemptions applicable to section 10 is available to it. It has adopted IFRS® Accounting
Standards. Inpahla is not subject to any specific exemptions available to state-owned
enterprises.
Inpahla has historically been the primary provider of bulk transport services for the mining
industry, and owns railways, ports and fuel pipeline infrastructure in South Africa. The vision
of the company is to unify and develop the South African economy by providing a globally
competitive, stable, reliable and cost-effective transport system. This should promote
sustainable growth and diversification of the country’s economy.
The company has the following divisions: national ports authority, port terminals, fuel pipelines,
engineering, freight rail, and property.
Inpahla has historically performed well, meeting its dual objectives of serving the country and
running at a profit to provide revenues for the government. In the past, the company relied on
operational cash generation and retained profits, coupled with a conservative debt policy, to
fund its activities. Inpahla’s average debt-to-equity ratio, including short-term debt, has
historically averaged between 40% and 45%, while its cash interest cover ratio was maintained
at a comfortable level of approximately four times. The cash interest cover ratio is calculated
as cash generated from operations (after changes in working capital) plus interest paid,
divided by interest paid.
In recent times the company has come under financial pressure, with deteriorating profitability
and rising debt levels due to increasing oil prices and losses stemming from adverse foreign
exchange movements. These factors have reinforced concerns about the deteriorating
domestic inflation outlook that persisted during previous reporting periods and subsequent
changes to interest rates by the South African Reserve Bank to reduce inflation, which
negatively impacted Inpahla’s operations. In addition, South Africa’s persistent electricity
constraints and heightened volatility in global prices for commodity exports also affected
mining customers, driving customer volumes and profitability down.
The interim results for the 2026 financial year (FY2026) reflected a significant deterioration in
Inpahla’s liquidity position and an increase in its obligations. The cash interest cover ratio
declined to 1,93 times.
Furthermore, Inpahla’s profitability decreased because of various operational challenges that
resulted in a decline in the volume of goods transported. These included the following:
• Ageing infrastructure;
• Damages due to train collisions;
• Community unrest and riots that affected the company’s ability to deliver;
• Shortage of spares for maintenance and repairs of equipment because of inflexible
procurement and localisation requirements (e.g., the requirement to buy spares from
local producers rather than import them);
• Lack of support from equipment manufacturers due to contractual disputes;
• Instances of train derailments;
IAC June 2026 2 (of 5) © SAICA 2026
Paper 1
• Theft of railway tracks;
• Adverse weather conditions;
• Power outages affecting lines due to electricity constraints or breakdowns; and
• Many instances of crime and theft that included irregular tender processes and
corruption.
2 Debt covenants
Inpahla’s persisting operational challenges, deteriorating performance, pressure on cash
flows, and ongoing liquidity and funding constraints, have placed debt covenants at risk. This
has resulted in debt rating agencies downgrading the credit rating of Inpahla.
Inpahla has bonds that are listed on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange and other international
markets. It recently published its reviewed interim results for the six months ended
30 September 2025 that showed a larger net loss than in the same period in FY2025. It also
reported a further increase in its net liability position from FY2025. Its auditors issued an
unmodified review report with an emphasis of matter paragraph on going concern for the
interim results.
The company is said to be experiencing political pressure to improve and report favourable
results due to increasing pressure on the government’s finances. A significant proportion of
Inpahla’s debt is guaranteed by the South African government. Inpahla management have
stated that, in view of the significant debt exposure, a modified audit opinion would result in a
default on the loan covenants. This would cause the company’s long-term debt to become
immediately payable, which could trigger the government’s guarantee. In management’s
opinion, this could lead to a further downgrade of the country’s sovereign risk by credit rating
agencies, potentially driving the country into a recession.
3 Turnaround strategies
In response to these challenges, the company has developed two potential turnaround
strategies relating specifically to the funding required to drive improvement in operational
performance, volume recovery and a return to profitability.
Proposal 1: Government funding and an increase in debt
Inpahla could request a guarantee of R47 billion from the government to support the funding
of the turnaround strategy. This would be used to raise further debt. Currently, lenders will not
provide funding to Inpahla without additional guarantees from the government.
The government would also be requested to inject additional equity into Inpahla in return for
the issue of more shares to reduce debt and meet the required financial ratios for Inpahla to
continue participating in the debt capital markets.
Furthermore, the company would also request a reduction in the onerous requirements of
public finance management legislation and regulations related to procurement requirements.
These relate particularly to spares for locomotives1 and port equipment, as such legislation
and regulations limit the speed with which procurement can be executed.
1 The powered component of a train, used for pulling railway carriages.
IAC June 2026 3 (of 5) © SAICA 2026
Paper 1
Proposal 2: Privatisation
Inpahla could enter into a public-private partnership with private sector participants on a basis
of 60% and 40% public sector and private sector ownership respectively. This would take the
form of setting up new subsidiary corporate entities. Corporate assets would be moved into
these subsidiary companies. This would enable Inpahla to contribute assets that are currently
not fully utilised and in need of capital investment for repairs and maintenance, while the
private investors would inject capital and bring the experience required to get the assets
operational. Both would share the benefits brought about by the partnership.
4 Damaged locomotives
Ten years ago, Inpahla purchased locomotives from a supplier, the Wuoche Locomotives
Corporation (‘Wuoche’) in China. A number of these locomotives were damaged by
derailments, accidents and incidents of vandalism. As a result, they have been out of service
and standing idle for six years or more. Wuoche has refused to supply the parts or design
information to repair the locomotives due to contractual disputes and ongoing corruption cases
in the original purchase process. This has resulted in payments for the locomotives being
frozen.
Due to the damaged locomotives, there has been a gradual deterioration in the services that
Inpahla is able to provide to its freight customers, affecting the mining industry in particular.
This has resulted in lost revenue for Inpahla and the mining customers which cannot trade as
they cannot deliver their goods. Furthermore, there has been lost tax revenues to the
government and increased unemployment.
According to legal experts, the dispute relating to Wuoche, the original supplier, will not be
resolved within the next five years and it is unlikely that it will agree to sell replacement parts
to Inpahla.
A proposal has been made to place the locomotives in a public-private partnership where
Inpahla partners with a private company, which will provide the funding to repair the
locomotives. The partnership will use a new supplier who would have to redesign, manufacture
and fit the components to get the damaged locomotives running. It is estimated that the entire
process will take approximately 12 months. A German supplier, Zug AG, approached Inpahla
with the redesign proposal. Zug has the necessary expertise to adapt existing parts from its
locomotive products to repair the damaged locomotives, which will attract redesign costs.
An assessment was performed to bring one locomotive back into service. The following
information was obtained from this reasonability assessment:
• The expectation is that once the locomotives are running again, they will have a five-
year operating period.
• The average redesign cost per locomotive is expected to be EUR95 000, payable
immediately. The redesign cost will be deductible for tax purposes in the year in which it
is incurred.
• The average manufacture and fitment cost is anticipated to be EUR184 000 per
locomotive. Half is payable at the start of the project, and half when installed at the end
of the first year. The South African Revenue Service (SARS) will allow deduction of these
repair component costs of 50% in year 1, 30% in year 2, and 20% in year 3 after being
brought into use. The repair component will have a zero fair value and tax value at the
end of the operating period.
IAC June 2026 4 (of 5) © SAICA 2026
Paper 1
• The original cost of one locomotive was R19 million. It can be sold for R12 million in its
current condition, which is the same as its current tax value. The tax deduction on the
locomotives will be claimed on a straight-line method after the locomotives are placed
back in service.
• The locomotive will have a tax value of R6 million at the end of the five years of operation,
and a fair market value of R11 million.
Once fully repaired, the locomotives will be placed back in service on the original route. The
company expects to earn a contribution of R4,3 million per annum per locomotive once fully
repaired. The additional average fixed costs per locomotive that will be incurred on route
maintenance will amount to R250 000 per annum once operations resume.
The proposal is to fund the repair cost using a debt instrument at an average interest cost of
8,5% per annum. The working capital required for each locomotive will need to be increased
by R120 000 initially, and then maintained for inflationary increases.
Indirect impacts of having the trains back in service for the government include increased
collections by SARS from the rail customers, who will be able to resume their operations, and
therefore earn additional profit that can be taxed. It is anticipated that SARS will collect
additional tax revenue per annum once the trains are running again. Additional mining royalties
that could be collected by SARS are estimated at R600 000 per locomotive per annum.
According to management, Inpahla’s target rate of return for rail operations is 13%.
Additional information
• The Euro to rand exchange rate on the implementation date of the project of 1 April 2026
was EUR1 : ZAR20.
• Forecast exchange rates are as follows:
o March 2027 EUR1 : ZAR20,40
o March 2028 EUR1 : ZAR20,80
• The current and projected inflation rate in South Africa is 5%.
• The tax rate applicable to Inpahla is 27%.
5 Green initiatives
During FY2026, Inpahla invested in green technologies to minimise its impact on the
environment. The green initiatives are aligned to the aims of the United Nations Sustainable
Development Goals 6 (clean water and sanitation) and 7 (sustainable and clean energy).
Inpahla installed solar panels on the rooftops of its buildings. This initiative not only reduces
Inpahla’s carbon footprint but also decreases its reliance on Eskom to power the operations
at its warehouses. In addition, traditional lighting systems were replaced by LED lighting. The
warehouses were also insulated and equipped with energy-efficient climate control systems.
The initiatives also resulted in a decreased monthly energy cost.
A rainwater harvesting system to collect and store rainwater for non-drinkable uses has also
been implemented. The harvested rainwater is used for the washing of vehicles, local
community irrigation and flushing of toilets.
IAC June 2026 5 (of 5) © SAICA 2026
Paper 1
6 Governance and assurance
The Inpahla board of directors and those charged with governance in all material aspects
subscribe to the principles of sound governance and ethical conduct. Inpahla has accordingly
adopted the King IV Report on Corporate Governance. It also strives to comply with all
relevant legislation and regulations.
As provided for in section 4(3) of the Public Audit Act, the Auditor-General of South Africa
opted not to perform the audit of Inpahla. Inpahla decided to change its auditors in 2025. The
board also wanted to enhance transparency and accountability and ensure rigorous
adherence to regulatory standards. This decision was taken with the consent of its
shareholder. The board also felt that a change in auditors might be warranted to mitigate
conflicts of interest or perceived biases, thereby improving public trust in the entity's financial
reporting.
After a rigorous audit tender process under the direction of Tomas Tank, the chair of the audit
committee, Ngabane KpT Inc. (‘NKT’), a medium-sized audit firm, was appointed as auditors
for FY2026. The board resolved that since NKT has provided some accounting services to
Inpahla during the past five years, there would be no need to sign a new engagement letter. It
replaced BAC Inc., who had acted as external auditors for the last 35 years. John James, the
audit partner in charge, is excited about this opportunity because the audit will bring a
significant amount of revenue to NKT.
IAC June 2026 1 (of 1) © SAICA 2026
Paper 1 part I required
INITIAL ASSESSMENT OF COMPETENCE, JUNE 2026
PROFESSIONAL PAPER 1
This paper consists of one scenario and two required parts.
Answer each required part in a separate answer book.
PAPER 1 PART I – REQUIRED
Marks
Sub-
total Total
(a) Prepare a SWOT analysis in view of the going concern challenges
experienced by Inpahla.
• Do not discuss the turnaround strategies in section 3.
Z1: Business internal environment
Z2: Business external environment
20
1
1 22
(b) Evaluate the two turnaround strategy financing proposals, based on the
current situation of Inpahla.
Y4: Judgement and decision making
10
1 11
(c) Prepare a capital budget, based on a single locomotive, to assess the
viability of the proposal by Zug AG for the damaged locomotives and
conclude whether Inpahla should go ahead with the proposal.
• Include nil effects, where relevant.
27
27
(d) Discuss how Inpahla’s green initiatives align with the United Nations
Sustainable Development Goals 6 and 7. 6 6
Total for part I 66
IAC June 2026 1 (of 1) © SAICA 2026
Paper 1 part II required
INITIAL ASSESSMENT OF COMPETENCE, JUNE 2026
PROFESSIONAL PAPER 1
This paper consists of one scenario and two required parts.
Answer each required part in a separate answer book.
PAPER 1 PART II – REQUIRED
Marks
Sub-
total Total
(e) Discuss the business ethics and professional ethical considerations that
NKT would need to consider about the alleged impact of defaults on loan
covenants.
• Include relevant safeguards.
• Assume that NKT also performed the interim review for the year.
I2: Business ethics – ethical reasoning skills
13
1 14
(f) Discuss the factors that NKT should have considered before the firm
accepted the audit of Inpahla for FY2026.
• Exclude the factors considered in part (e) from your answer.
X1: Communication skill – logical argument
10
1 11
(g) (i) Assess the risk of material misstatement at the financial statement
level of Inpahla for the FY2026 audit; and
(ii) Describe a suitable overall audit response for the FY2026 audit
based on your risk assessment.
• Do not address the risks identified in part (g)(i) individually but
describe the overall audit responses in general for all risks.
X1: Communication skill – clarity of expression
12
6
1 19
(h) Formulate the audit procedures to perform at the FY2026 year end to audit
the going concern of Inpahla. 10 10
Total for part II 54
TOTAL FOR THE PAPER 120
