Source: SAICA IAC June 2025 — Paper 3 question (Reprop).
Extracted for internal IAC diagnostic use. SAICA owns these examination documents.

IAC June 2025 1 (of 9) © SAICA 2025
Paper 3
PAPER 3 120 marks
Ignore taxation.
1 REPROP
1.1 Reprop: Background
Remmie Properties Ltd (‘Reprop’) is a company that develops new properties in suburban
areas across South Africa. It is listed on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange and focuses on
large metropolitan areas such as Tshwane, Cape Town and Nelson Mandela Bay. Reprop
does not retain ownership of the properties but transfers ownership to a new homeowner as
each property is completed. The land in the estate which is not developed as housing and
sold to homeowners is community land which contains all the communal facilities.
With the increase in crime rates, challenges with municipal service delivery and issues with
electricity, Reprop decided to take advantage of the surge in the demand for gated community
estates with sustainable water and electricity solutions by developing an estate on a piece of
land it owns in Tshwane. Through this venture, Reprop can enter a new market of buyers
looking for this type of lifestyle.
1.2 Development of Spark-of-Afrika
In 2021, Reprop commenced development of Spark-of-Afrika, an estate built to accommodate
100 homes, with erfs (stands) ranging from 800 to 1 800 m2 per property. Homeowners receive
full ownership title in the homes that they purchase within the estate. The Spark-of-Afrika
estate includes a clubhouse with a gym, a restaurant and a communal swimming pool as well
as a park. The clubhouse, gym and restaurant have state-of-the-art equipment requiring
competent staff to operate and maintain it. The estate also has 24-hour security guards at the
entrance to the estate, in addition to patrols to enhance residents’ security and limit
unauthorised entry into the estate.
As Reprop will not retain ownership of Spark-of-Afrika, it registered the Spark-of-Afrika
Homeowners Association NPC (‘the Spark-HOA’) as a non-profit company. On
1 January 2023, by which time 25 homes had been purchased in the estate, Reprop
transferred ownership of the common areas to the Spark-HOA.
All common areas and improvements, such as roads, streetlights and gardens on the exterior
of each stand, including the clubhouse, gym, swimming pool, restaurant and park, are the
property of the Spark-HOA and not the homeowners. Upon the transfer of assets from Reprop
to the Spark-HOA, a valuation of the common property was performed, and it was valued at
R26,15 million.
1.3 Reprop: Auditors
Reprop has a 31 December financial year end and prepares its financial statements in
accordance with IFRS® Accounting Standards (IFRS). At the annual general meeting (AGM)
held in June 2024, the chief executive officer (CEO) announced that he had appointed JEM
Inc. as the registered auditors for the financial year ending 31 December 2024 (FY2024). JEM
IAC June 2025 2 (of 9) © SAICA 2025
Paper 3
Inc. is a small established firm with two registered audit partners, two audit managers and ten
trainee accountants, all operating from an office in Durban. The CEO decided that a change
in auditors, from one of the biggest audit firms in South Africa, was necessary after a dispute
with the prior engagement partner. JEM Inc. presented its engagement letter to Reprop, which
it signed without any amendments or restrictions, on 2 July 2024.
1.4 Reprop: Municipal billings
The financial statements of Reprop for FY2024 includes a material disclosure note of a
R1 million contingent liability with a very vague description. When the audit manager of
JEM Inc. requested further details on this amount, the chief financial officer responded as
follows:
This amount is due to historic municipal underbilling for the Spark-of-Afrika water and
electricity usage during the development phase in 2021 and 2022. Since the
commencement of the development of Spark-of-Afrika, the municipal accounts have not
reflected any water or electricity usage. We have not performed any estimates /
calculations in the past but feel it should be disclosed now and therefore we did a
calculation for the water and the electricity to support our disclosure amount. In
performing this calculation, we multiplied the water and electricity usage according to
the bulk meters we could identify by the rate for 2021 and 2022. As the Spark-HOA
obtained ownership of the common property on 1 January 2023, Reprop did not need
an estimate for FY2023 or FY2024. The municipality is so inefficient that we have
decided not to report this issue – it is unlikely we will find anyone helpful to assist
anyway. I am sure they will decide to issue a backdated account to Reprop at some
stage. If so, we know someone who can help make this problem disappear. We have
just estimated the amount payable for the period from commencement of construction
until the common property was handed over to the Spark-HOA.
2 THE SPARK-HOA
2.1 The Spark-HOA: Background
Homeowners who purchase a home within Spark-of-Afrika automatically become members of
the Spark-HOA and can access all amenities. They participate in its governance and have the
right to nominate and vote for the appointment of the directors of the Spark-HOA.
Reprop established a memorandum of incorporation (MOI) and membership rules for the
Spark-HOA, which are enforced upon all members. The provisions of the MOI stipulate that
the Spark-HOA should have a functioning audit committee and that the Spark-HOA is subject
to an audit. In addition, the Spark-HOA exercises control over the provision of services, such
as maintenance of common areas, hiring clubhouse and security staff, appointing contractors
to carry out services within the estate, and collecting the monthly levies that each homeowner
is obligated to pay. The monthly levies from members of the Spark-HOA are used to finance
common property expenses such as salaries, security, garden upkeep, facility improvements
and payments for water and electricity usage on common property. Homeowners are
responsible for the water and electricity payments related to their own properties.
IAC June 2025 3 (of 9) © SAICA 2025
Paper 3
2.2 The Spark-HOA: Strategy and governance
The members of the Spark-HOA appointed the following individuals to serve on the board of
directors:
Name Portfolio Occupation
Mr Joe Budden Chairman of the board Entrepreneur
Mr Archie Fernando Audit and finance Accounting teacher
Ms Ashley Adams Human resources Insurance agent
Ms Lebo Sekoto Properties Supply chain manager
Mr Francois de Kok Legal Lawyer
Mr Simon Carter Facilities management Film director
The directors are not remunerated for their work in this capacity.
The Spark-HOA is governed by the Companies Act and the Community Schemes Ombud
Service Act. While adherence to the King IV Report on Corporate Governance is not
mandatory for homeowners’ associations, the Spark-HOA applies its principles and
recommended practices as it provides guidelines on good governance, ethical leadership, risk
management, financial management, and owner engagement.
The MOI contains the following provisions:
• The directors cannot approve contracts exceeding R250 000 without the approval of the
majority of the Spark-HOA members;
• All improvements to the clubhouse and common areas can only be made following
approval at an AGM;
• A stringent process must be followed for the appointment of new contractors, and this is
to be enforced by the facilities management portfolio owner in consultation with the
board and members of the Spark-HOA;
• The directors are accountable to the Spark-HOA members; and
• Details of emergency expenditure must be circulated to the members for approval by
means of a resolution.
The Spark-HOA's strategic goals are focused on maintaining property values, fostering a
community spirit and ensuring that Spark-of-Afrika remains a desirable place to live. The goals
are as follows:
1 Maintaining and enhancing property values: Enforcing rules and regulations regarding
property upkeep, landscaping and exterior modifications to ensure a uniform and
attractive appearance of homes and common areas. Proper maintenance and
improvement of the clubhouse and other common areas to enhance community appeal
and functionality.
2 Financial stability and transparency: Establishing and managing the annual budget,
ensuring sufficient reserve funds for future repairs and improvements, and conducting
regular audits of annual financial statements. Implementing effective systems for
collecting levies to ensure that financial resources are available for ongoing and future
projects.
3 Community engagement and communication: Maintaining open lines of communication
with members through newsletters, a website, social media and regular meetings to
keep them informed about the Spark-HOA activities, decisions and community events.
IAC June 2025 4 (of 9) © SAICA 2025
Paper 3
4 Safety and security: Ensuring a safe living environment by implementing and
maintaining safety measures such as security patrols and proper lighting in common
areas. Developing and promoting preparedness plans for natural disasters and other
emergencies.
5 Regulatory compliance and governance: Ensuring adherence to the Spark-HOA's
covenants, conditions and restrictions, as well as national and municipal laws. Providing
ongoing training and resources for board members to ensure effective governance and
decision making.
6 Sustainability and environmental stewardship: Promoting environmentally friendly
practices such as recycling programmes, water conservation and using sustainable
materials in community projects. Encouraging energy-efficient upgrades and practices
among homeowners and in common areas to reduce the community's environmental
footprint.
The following is an extract of the minutes of the AGM:
MINUTES OF THE SPARK-HOA AGM
HELD ON 4 JUNE 2024
Present
93 units in person or by proxy (as per the signed attendance register)
By invitation
Ms Sarah Lessing (external auditor)
1 Welcome
2 Election of chairperson
Mr Joe Budden was elected as the chairperson of the meeting.
3 Minutes of previous meeting
4 Auditors
The Spark-HOA has a 31 December financial year end and prepares its financial
statements in accordance with IFRS. The Spark-HOA was audited by L&P
Registered Auditors Inc. (‘L&P RA’) in 2023. Mr Budden emphasised that the audit
engagement partner, Ms Sarah Lessing CA(SA), RA, is familiar with the operations
of the Spark-HOA since she was the designated auditor on the engagement in the
previous year. Mr Budden feels that the Spark-HOA audit is not mandatory because
the company is a non-profit company, and the audit is only undertaken because of
the MOI. Mr Budden accordingly believes there would not be an issue with the re-
appointment of L&P RA. The members approved the re-appointment of L&P RA to
audit the Spark-HOA for FY2024.
5 Finance portfolio
The chairman of the board raised concerns about the late payment of levies and
annual financial statements not being approved on time due to late preparation. In
addition, some members complained that they were not receiving levy statements
and correspondence on time. Consequently, the members at the meeting resolved
that a new director be appointed for the finance portfolio as it appears that Mr
Fernando, who was not present at the meeting, is disinterested in his role. All
members voted in favour of appointing Ms Carol Senande, a newly qualified CA(SA),
as the director in charge of the finance portfolio.
IAC June 2025 5 (of 9) © SAICA 2025
Paper 3
The board appointed L&P Prop (Pty) Ltd (‘L&P Prop’), a property management
company and a subsidiary of L&P RA., to prepare the annual financial statements on
time on behalf of the Spark-HOA. Mr Budden assured the members that although
L&P Prop is a subsidiary of L&P RA, the audit company is totally separate from L&P
Prop.
6 Contract services
The chairman informed members that he approved a new garden service contractor
and appointed a new security company as of 1 January 2024. He believes they both
have thus far been offering far better services than the previous contractors.
7 Closing
After the AGM Carol established that her role would include the timely collection of levies from
members as well as review of annual financial statements, preparation of annual budgets, and
approval of expenses. Carol discovered that the board of directors has been making
questionable decisions. Carol fears that the role of the board chairperson has not been
executed with the necessary diligence and care. Joe was the first to purchase a home in the
estate and ensures that he is involved in all decision making so that all portfolios are
coordinated and that the Spark-HOA complies with the MOI and membership rules as per his
interpretation. Joe takes pride in his influence on the board.
In addition, the appointment of the new contractors posed the following concerns to Carol:
1 The contractor responsible for gardening services and upkeep of common areas, Joey
Budden, is the first-born son of Joe. Joey and his father are both involved in the
operations of the garden services company.
2 Joe insisted on a change in the security company without providing reasons. The new
security company quoted the Spark-HOA an annual fee of R1,5 million, which is 13%
higher than the fee charged by the previous security company.
3 The facilities management director also told her that neither one of the contractors meets
the minimum B-BBEE requirements, despite this being stipulated in the Spark-HOA’s
contractor appointment protocols.
The properties director noted that she had a problem with some improvements that had been
made on the common areas that were not necessary. Some of the contractors appointed for
these improvements had not been approved in terms of the contractor appointment processes
and the directors (apart from Joe) were also of the opinion that these had been wasteful
expenditures. The appointment of these contractors was not included in the minutes of the
directors' meetings. However, for fear of challenging Joe, these contractors were accepted,
and the related expenses were incurred. Carol discovered that these contractors had been
approved via a message in the board of directors' WhatsApp chat group.
2.3 The Spark-HOA: Solar and water backup solutions
At the time of the 4 June 2024 AGM, none of the homes in the Spark-of-Afrika estate had solar
or water backup solutions. The board of the Spark-HOA was tasked by the homeowners with
performing a viability assessment of solar and water backup solutions for individual home use.
Critical considerations would be whether these solutions should be procured under the Spark-
HOA or procured independently by the homeowners. All solutions are to be purchased and
ready for use on 1 July 2025.
IAC June 2025 6 (of 9) © SAICA 2025
Paper 3
The properties director approached a trusted supplier of solar and water backup solutions,
who provided the following quotations for different solar and water packages for individual
home use:
Package Notes
Price per
package
R
Solar solution
Mini-solution 1 93 500
Grow-solution 1 155 000
Plus-solution 1 245 000
Water solution
Starter 5 000 litre 2 33 920
Combo 10 000 litre 2 56 800
Notes
1 The solar packages all include solar panels, lithium batteries and hybrid inverters, but
differ in quantity and type of product. The price also includes the installation of these
solutions at individual homes. Homeowners will be able to add solar panels to the
packages at their own cost at any time, should they wish to do so.
2 The water packages all include water tanks, pumps, UV lights and water filters but differ
in size and type of product. The price of water packages includes the installation at
individual homes. These are connected in such a way that homeowners can make 100%
use of rainwater while the water tanks are full but can also fill tanks with municipal water
from the main water lines if necessary.
2.3.1 Procurement of solar and water solutions under the Spark-HOA
The supplier offered a discount of 15% on each solution package if the Spark-HOA procures
water and solar solutions for use by homeowners who elect to participate (all quoted prices
provided are before the 15% discount). All installations will be completed by 30 June 2025.
On completion of the installations on 1 July 2025, the Spark-HOA will pay for the water and
solar solutions. An additional special monthly levy, which will be over and above the standard
ordinary monthly levy, will be payable by homeowners who elect to participate in the
procurement under the Spark-HOA option. The special monthly levy will cover the installation,
insurance and maintenance of the package chosen and will be introduced for a period of three
years, starting on 1 July 2025. The special monthly levy will be based on the type of solar and
water solution package that is installed at each of the owner’s homes:
Package
Special
monthly
levy
R
Solar solution
Mini-solution 3 500
Grow-solution 4 800
Plus-solution 7 200
Water solution
Starter 5 000 litre 960
Combo 10 000 litre 1 500
IAC June 2025 7 (of 9) © SAICA 2025
Paper 3
A survey was carried out on the types of solar and water solution packages homeowners
would consider. From the survey it was estimated that 20 homeowners would prefer the Plus-
solution solar package, 60 the Grow-solution and 18 the Mini-solution. The remaining two
homeowners indicated that they did not want a solar solution. In the case of the water
solutions, there is an 80% probability that 60 homeowners would opt for the Combo 10 000
litre, while 40 homeowners would opt for the Starter 5 000 litre. However, there is a 20%
probability that only 35 homeowners would opt for the Combo 10 000 litre and 65 for the Starter
5 000 litre.
The Spark-HOA will take out insurance for the water and solar solution packages for a period
of three years, commencing on 1 July 2025. After this period these costs will be for each
homeowner’s own account. The insurance company offered a special quotation that would
cover all the water and solar solutions purchased by the Spark-HOA. This entailed a monthly
premium of R750 for each solar solution package and R350 for each water solution package,
irrespective of the type of water or solar package procured. The quotation stipulated an annual
increase of 8% in the insurance premiums.
A maintenance company will be contracted to perform annual services and maintenance on
the installed water and solar solutions for the three-year period starting 1 July 2025. After this
period these costs will be for each homeowner’s own account. The maintenance company will
charge the Spark-HOA a standard base fee per annum for servicing all the solutions, while a
variable tariff will be charged per maintenance hour for general repairs. The variable per hour
tariff will be at a certain rate for the first 100 maintenance hours worked, after which it will
decrease to a lower variable per hour tariff for any hours in excess of 100 maintenance hours
worked for the remainder of the three-year contract (i.e., variable hours are considered on a
cumulative basis over three years).
The average total annual service and maintenance fees payable by the Spark-HOA per the
contract based on different estimated maintenance hours used in the first year starting on
1 July 2025 are as follows:
Total annual service
and maintenance bill
Estimated
maintenance hours
usedR
275 000 50
290 000 80
322 500 150
367 500 250
It is estimated that homeowners will use 25 maintenance hours in total in the first contractual
year, 55 maintenance hours in the second and 85 maintenance hours in the third. An
inflationary annual increase of 4% is expected for both the fixed and variable portion of the
maintenance cost.
2.3.2 Independent procurement of solar and water solutions by the homeowners
If the Spark-HOA does not procure water and solar solutions for the homeowners, the
homeowners will have the option to procure these solutions independently.
The second part of the survey, on independent procurement, showed that between 70% and
90% of the current homeowners will indeed be interested in procuring solutions independently.
However, not all will procure solutions right away, predominantly due to individual cash flow
constraints, and installations will be done over the next five years.
IAC June 2025 8 (of 9) © SAICA 2025
Paper 3
2.4 The Spark-HOA: Sustainability and environmental performance forecast
The Spark-HOA expects a sharp decrease in the purchase of both electricity and water from
the municipality if it procures electricity and water solutions for the homeowners to be installed
on 1 July 2025 for two reasons: (1) because of the self-generation and storage by
homeowners, and (2) because homeowners will become more environmentally conscious.
This sharp decrease is expected to reduce and normalise to a steady trend over a longer term
of usage as homeowners reach optimal levels of self-generation and storage.
The following annual information forecast was based on expected homeowner behaviour and
the assumption that the Spark-HOA will procure solar and water solutions from 1 July 2025:
FY2025
Actual
FY2026
Forecast
FY2027
Forecast
FY2028
Forecast
Average electricity consumption
per home per month 1 200 kWh 1 150 kWh 850 kWh 750 kWh
Average electricity purchased
(from the municipality) per home
per month 1 200 kWh 935 kWh 400 kWh 290 kWh
Average water consumption per
home per month 25 kilolitres 25 kilolitres 20 kilolitres 18 kilolitres
Average water purchased (from
the municipality) per home per
month 25 kilolitres 10 kilolitres 8 kilolitres 6 kilolitres
Homes using recycling
programmes 60 65 75 80
2.5 The Spark-HOA: Financing
If the Spark-HOA decides to fund the solar and water backup solutions, the board of directors,
including Carol, have proposed the following options to raise funds for this acquisition:
Option 1
Arrange a secured loan using the clubhouse as collateral to source additional funds from
financial institutions. The loan will have the following terms:
Principal amount R17,4 million
Effective annual interest rate Prime less 1%
Term 3 years
The principal amount together with interest will be repaid in three equal annual instalments,
with the first repayment due on 30 June 2026.
Attorney and upfront loan fees will amount to 4% of the total loan amount.
Option 2
Source a sustainability-linked loan from SusBank. SusBank is willing to extend a loan of
R17,4 million for a three-year term. The principal will be repayable at the end of the loan term
at a premium of 10%. Interest is payable annually, with a year 1 interest rate of 9,5%. For
years 2 and 3, the year 1 interest rate will decrease by 15% for each year in which all the
following conditions are met:
IAC June 2025 9 (of 9) © SAICA 2025
Paper 3
Average electricity consumption per home 15% annual decrease
Average water consumption per home 20% annual decrease
Homes using recycling programmes 15% annual increase
Attorney and upfront loan fees will amount to 2% of the total loan amount.
Option 3
Use the cash reserve balance which is intended to be used by the Spark-HOA on future
repairs, maintenance and improvements on common areas property, to fund the balance
required for the initial investment in the solar and water backup solutions. The cash reserve
balance is currently earning interest of 6% per annum.
2.6 The Spark-HOA: Additional information
1 The weighted average cost of capital of the Spark-HOA is 15%.
2 The South African prime rate is 11,75%.
IAC June 2025 1 (of 1) © SAICA 2025
Paper 3 required part I
INITIAL ASSESSMENT OF COMPETENCE, JUNE 2025
PROFESSIONAL PAPER 3
This paper consists of one scenario and two required parts.
Answer each required part in a separate answer book.
PAPER 3 PART I – REQUIRED
Marks
Sub-
total Total
(a) Discuss, with reference to section 1.3 (Reprop: Auditors), the matters
JEM Inc. should consider regarding its appointment as the auditors
of Reprop for FY2024.
X1: Communication skill – logical argument
12
1 13
(b) With reference to section 1.4 (Reprop: Municipal billings) –
(i) discuss the risks of material misstatement at the assertion level
for the contingent liability of Reprop in FY2024; and
(ii) formulate substantive tests of detail procedures to verify the
existence, accuracy, valuation and allocation, and
presentation, of the contingent liability of Reprop for FY2024.
6
13 19
(c) Discuss, with reference to section 1.4 (Reprop: Municipal billings),
the ethical concerns related to Reprop’s decision on the municipal
underbilling.
• Do not discuss any aspects related to the SAICA or IRBA Codes
of Professional Conduct.
6
6
(d) Discuss any concerns you may have with regard to the Spark-HOA’s
compliance with the Companies Act.
• Do not discuss any concerns related to section 45 of the
Companies Act.
• Do not discuss any concerns related to the composition of the
audit committee.
X1: Communication skill – clarity of expression
13
1 14
(e) Discuss Carol’s professional responsibility relating to the information
that she discovered at and after the AGM of the Spark-HOA.
Y6: Ethical reasoning
11
1 12
Total for part I 64
IAC June 2025 1 (of 1) © SAICA 2025
Paper 3 required part II
INITIAL ASSESSMENT OF COMPETENCE, JUNE 2025
PROFESSIONAL PAPER 3
This paper consists of one scenario and two required parts.
Answer each required part in a separate answer book.
PAPER 3 PART II – REQUIRED
Marks
Sub-
total Total
(f) Critically evaluate whether the decisions of the board of directors of
the Spark-HOA align with its strategic objectives.
• Do not discuss sustainability and environmental strategic goals.
• Do not discuss regulatory compliance and governance issues.
9
9
(g) Perform a net present value analysis and conclude on whether the
Spark-HOA should undertake to procure solar and water solutions
under the Spark-HOA based on the information in the scenario.
• Assume for calculation purposes that all cash flows occur at the
end of the year.
• Do not consider the impact on the homeowners of savings in
electricity and water costs.
• Do not include the effect of the financing of the project.
Y4: Decision making
20
1 21
(h) Evaluate the performance forecast of the Spark-HOA in line with its
sustainability, environmental stewardship and strategic goals.
• Assume that the water and solar solutions are procured under
the Spark-HOA.
• Base your evaluation on relevant non-financial performance
indicators.
X1: Communication skill – logical argument
9
1 10
(i) Write a report to the board of directors of the Spark-HOA, in which you
advise it on the best option for financing the solar and water backup
solutions.
• Assume that the sustainability-linked loan conditions in option 2
of section 2.5 (The Spark-HOA: Financing) are met.
• Assume that the water and solar solutions are procured under
the Spark-HOA.
X1: Communication skill – layout and structure
15
1 16
Total for part II 56
TOTAL FOR THE PAPER 120
IAC June 2025 2 (of 1) © SAICA 2025
Paper 3 required part II
