Source: SAICA ITC January 2024 — Paper 2 Question 1 suggested solution (XS Gaming).
Extracted for internal IAC diagnostic use. SAICA owns these examination documents.

ITC JANUARY 2024 SUGGESTED SOLUTION
PAPER 2 QUESTION 1
Paper 2 question 1 1 © SAICA 2024
Part (a) Criticise the free cash flow valuation of Metaverse for the proposed
80% share purchase.
• Do not reperform the valuation.
• Assume all amounts are correctly calculated.
Marks
1 The forecasted revenue growth does not seem to be in line with global
expectations of industry growth of 7.9% (acceptable to make reference to
CAGR of 9%) up to 2027 before tapering off to 2%.
The revenue growth should be a combination of industry anticipated growth,
and the market share gains the company anticipates it can achieve.
1
1
2 The revenue forecast appears to be based off the 2023 year, which was
affected by non-recurring load shedding. which is not representative of future
revenue expectations.
The increase then appears to be at a rate of 5% for two years which is not
justified adequately as an assumption (and it is not in line with the anticipated
30% growth).
The forecast period is therefore too short and should be extended to include
all years until stability in cash flows is achieved, in other words 2027 at the
earliest.
The anticipated revenues from new developments have not been estimated
and included, and risk relating to new revenues not adjusted for.
The revenues should be adjusted to reflect the anticipated 30% growth for the
next three years, with a perpetuity growth thereafter of 5%.
1
1
1
1
1
3 The anticipated revenue from the new developments have not been included.
Was the intention to value the new developments separately from the existing
business?
The growth of mobile gaming also does not appear to be factored into the
revenue forecasts, this should be estimated and incorporated.
1
1
4 As the cost of sales are predominantly fixed costs, the forecasts should not
have reduced to the extent that they did.
It seems that the forecast has incorrectly treated these costs as being variable,
the growth from 2024 to 2025 being 5% (same as the growth in revenue).
The cost of sales should be included as fixed costs or analysed and split into
fixed and variable components for the forecasting.
1
1
1
5 The depreciation is non-cash and would normally be removed from the cash
flows as a non-cash item.
The depreciation on server infrastructure and software however approximates
replacement, and therefore it is appropriate not to remove as it estimates the
replacement of the capital cost of these assets.
The depreciation on the solar installation is however non-cash, and therefore
should be removed as non-cash. The solar installation will need replacing after
10 years, as such the estimated capital expenditure that will then be likely will
need to be forecasted.
1
1
1
6 There is no justification or calculation for the foreign currency gain/loss
forecast. This is a volatile item and should be considered more carefully, as it
is not possible to forecast these cash flows. As such this item should be
removed from the free-cash flow forecasts. 1
7 The dividends from the exchange traded fund (ETF) included in other income
should be removed from the cash flows as they are exposed to different risks.
The ETF shares should be valued separately at R10.25 mil and added to the
value of the enterprise.
1
1
8 Finance costs should not be included in the forecast as they would have been
included in the weighted average cost of capital (WACC). There is no overdraft
ITC JANUARY 2024 SUGGESTED SOLUTION
PAPER 2 QUESTION 1
Paper 2 question 1 2 © SAICA 2024
facility, therefore none of this interest is operational and therefore not in
WACC.
The short–term loan relates to the interest-bearing borrowings and is
considered part of the financing, therefore should not be included as part of
the working capital base.
1
1
9 The interest on permanent cash surplus should not have been included in the
free-cash flow forecasts. The permanent cash surplus on valuation date
should have been added as additional value to the value of the enterprise.
As such it is incorrect to include the entire cash and cash equivalents in the
calculation of the movement in working capital; only the portion of the cash
surplus relating to the operations of Metaverse should be included in the
calculation of the movement in working capital.
1
1
10 It is evident that no cash tax has been calculated and included in the
calculation of the free-cash flows.
It would be more correct to adjust the cash tax amounts forecasted for the tax
payable at the beginning and the end of each year, than it is to include the
movements in the tax payable as part of the movement in the working capital.
1
1
11 The working capital base being the movement is correct (excluding the short–
term loan portion, tax payable and permanent cash surplus noted above), the
forecast should however continue for each of these items, and the movement
should be used as the cash flow. To address this, the respective items for part
of working capital should be expressed as a percentage of revenue (for a
normal year) and applied to the forecast revenue for each year of the forecasts
in order to forecast the working capital needs and consequently the movement
therein. 1
12 The value of the perpetuity (terminal value) has not been discounted back to
the start of 2024, being the valuation date. The free-cash flow should be
adjusted for the growth into perpetuity (5% p.a.) before capitalising it. 1
13 The WACC of XS Gaming will not reflect the same risks as Metaverse; the
WACC of Metaverse should be calculated. 1
14 The cost of equity (its derived beta-factor) has not been adjusted appropriately
for the specific risks that the company faces:
• The company only has one product, although there are others in
development, the rate should be increased for the dependency risk
associated with having a single product, and not having diversified revenue
streams.
• The company has unique skills and technologies / potential new products,
therefore revenue potential; rate should be decreased.
1
1
15 As Metaverse is unlisted, the value of its equity should have been adjusted for
a discount to reflect the fact that its shares are not marketable and funding not
being as accessible as is the case for a listed company. 1
16 As a controlling stake is being valued, the value of the equity should have
been adjusted for a control premium. 1
17 The intangibles should not be added at cost, instead a fair value should be
determined by forecasting the revenues and costs which they would generate. 1
18 The valuation does not calculate the amount for the transaction by multiplying
by 80%, as only a part of the company is being purchases. 1
19 Are the interest-bearing borrowings deducted at fair value? As they were on
average sourced at fixed rates, the fair value of the borrowings will need to be
determined. 1
Available 34
Maximum 19
Communication skills – logical argument 1
Total for part (a) 20
ITC JANUARY 2024 SUGGESTED SOLUTION
PAPER 2 QUESTION 1
Paper 2 question 1 3 © SAICA 2024
Part (b) Calculate and advise the management of XS how the acquisition
should be financed, considering the related funding needs of the
company.
• Include an analysis of the characteristics of each financing
option and conclude with a recommendation.
• Fur purposes of the calculation do not offset any amounts of the
cash balance.
Marks
Loan and equity calculations
Origin Bank Loan 0 1 2 3 4
Loan receipt 500.00 ½
Transaction cost -5.00 ½
Loan repayment -815.24 1
Tax shield (S24O) 17.55 19.83 22.41 25.32 1P
Net cash flow 495.00 17.55 19.83 22.41 -789.91
Rate after tax (IRR) 9.75% 1P
Interest calculation 65.00 73.45 83.00 93.79 1P
Genesis Bank loan 0 1 2 3 4 5
Loan receipt 500.00 ½
Transaction cost -5.00 ½
Interest -70.00 -70.00 -70.00 -70.00 -70.00 ½
Tax shield (S24O) 18.90 18.90 18.90 18.90 18.90 ½
Loan repayment -500.00 ½
Net cash flow 495.00 -51.10 -51.10 -51.10 -51.10 -551.10
Rate after tax (IRR) 10.49% 1P
Rights issue
Number of rights 100mil/10 10 mil 1
Issue price (30.4*80%) 24.32 1
Amount raised R243.2 mil 1P
Calculation marks 11½
Strategic considerations
Cash balance
The cash balance of R382 million is not sufficient to finance the full value of the
R500 million required, although it is sufficient for the equity investment per the
valuation of R70.85 million x 80%, assuming this is the agreed transaction value.
The remaining funding required for integrating the operations may be required over a
period, and as such the company may be able to accumulate the cash over that period
from trading activities.
One would however need to consider the cash utilised by the existing operations so
as not to expose XS Gaming Limited to undue liquidity risk. It is important to consider
the impact that the boom in the gaming industry due to the COVID-19 pandemic; with
the world returning to some form of “normality”, the era of “super-profits” has passed,
and it would be advisable for to retain its free cash flow.
1
1
1
ITC JANUARY 2024 SUGGESTED SOLUTION
PAPER 2 QUESTION 1
Paper 2 question 1 4 © SAICA 2024
Origin Bank Loan
As South Africa has likely reached the peak of the interest rate cycle, interest rates
are likely to drop in the interest rate market in the near term; the Origin Bank loan
having a variable interest rate would impact positively on the finance charges incurred
on said loan (alt: the Genesis Bank loan would expose XS Gaming Limited to interest
rate risk given that the interest rate on the loan is fixed, resulting in no benefit for the
company when interest rates start dropping).
Repayment of the loan by means of one bullet repayment at end of four-year term is
beneficial from a cash flow perspective; no cash outflows until the end of the loan
term, resulting in a positive cash saving annually.
The flip-side is that it also creates a risk of not being able to afford the single bullet
repayment – should it not match cash inflows with outflows.
A S24O tax shield on interest incurred will arise; this tax benefit will not arise should
the cash surplus or rights issue be used to finance the investment and integration
costs.
The security which encumbers inventory and receivables will reduce the cost of the
loan, but does reduce debt capacity going forward, which is not the case with the
Genesis loan.
The covenants on interest cover and debt equity may become a constraint in future;
the company is however performing well at present and therefore the loan covenants
would not be an issue at this stage.
1
1
1
1
1
1
Genesis Loan
Longer term of the loan being five years is favourable, as XS Gaming Limited has an
additional year to settle the capital outstanding on the loan. 1
Rights issue
The benefit from a cash flow perspective of neither having an interest commitment
(although dividends may be a softer commitment as it won’t want to reduce these) nor
needing to return capital over the 4-/5-year term respectively, needs to be considered.
While it is a rights issue, it will not necessarily dilute the existing shareholders’ stakes
in unless they are unable to take up the rights. Assess whether shareholders would
have the capacity to exercise the rights.
The potential dilution is on a 10: 1 basis, therefore it would not be a significant dilution
if existing shareholders are not in a position to exercise the rights.
The XS Gaming Limited shares are viewed as being undervalued at present; the
timing of the issue is not favourable and as such issuing equity at present would not
be advisable until the share price picks up, resulting in the higher proceeds from an
equity issue in future (or fewer shares having to be issued in future to raise the same
amount of funding).
The amount likely to be raised is not sufficient for the R500 mil required.
1
1
1
1
1
Conclusion
Recommendation is to use up some of the cash resources, as these would not be
yielding sufficient return equalling at least the WACC of XS.
Fund the remainder with debt, which is cheaper (the after-tax cost of the Origin Bank
loan of 9.75% p.a. is less than the cost of equity of 22%) and creates a more efficient
capital structure as XS’ gearing levels are currently low, and it would avoid a dilution
resulting from the issuing of shares while the share price is low.
The Origin Bank loan would be favoured as it is cheaper and more flexible, and the
covenants and encumbrances are not necessarily qualitatively material based on the
profitability and financial status of XS Gaming Limited at present.
1
1
1
Discussion 18
Available 28½
Maximum 19
Communication skills – appropriate style 1
Total for part (b) 20
ITC JANUARY 2024 SUGGESTED SOLUTION
PAPER 2 QUESTION 1
Paper 2 question 1 5 © SAICA 2024
Part (c) Discuss any concerns you may have with respect to the
conversation that Jessica overheard about the new game launch.
• Ignore the SAICA Code of Professional Conduct in your
discussion.
Marks
Good for Self and Others
1 In the short-term, going ahead with the release tomorrow will be good for XS
Gaming Limited as this conduct will ultimately increase its revenue and
uphold its reputation as a Company that adheres to its commitment to the
public.
1
1
2 It will also be good for the company's marketing staff in the short-term whose
incentive bonus will increase because of the game's launch. 1
3 However, in the long-term there will be negative consequences for XS
Gaming Limited as those who have purchased the game experience issues
such as losses of data, viruses etc. and this will result in reputational damage
and losses in future sales.
1
1
4 If any customers are adversely affected by security breaches (i.e., they could
have confidential information breached), legal action could be taken, and
this could result in future litigation and legal fees, and financial compensation
having to be paid. 1
5 Since XS Gaming Limited is listed on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange
(JSE), the above governance challenges have the potential to affect its
listing. 1
6 All the above repercussions may ultimately negatively affect XS Gaming
Limited's shareholders as the company value will potentially decline. 1
Companies Act
7 The CEO and COO are not acting in the best interest of the company as is
required and may thus be in breach of Section 76, as they could be seen to
not be acting honestly and with the degree of care, skill and diligence, having
failed to properly test the new game before launching it. 1
8 The CEO and COO are not acting in the best interest of the company as is
required and may thus also be in breach of Section 22, if it can be proven
that they acted with gross negligence in launching a product that could have
major security issues or resulting in a loss of personal information for the
Metaverse customers. 1
9 As a result, the CEO and COO can be held personally liable for losses
suffered by XS Gaming Limited in terms of Section 77, for not having acted
in the best interests of the company. 1
King IV
10 Should the launch go ahead tomorrow, XS Gaming Limited's governing body
will be in breach of Principle 1 'Ethical and effective leadership' - due to their
actions of not being honest and transparent. 1
11 Should the launch go ahead tomorrow, XS Gaming Limited's governing body
will be in breach of Principle 3: 'The governing body should ensure that the
organisation is, and is seen to be, a responsible corporate citizen' - due to
not having properly tested the new game and going ahead and launching it,
this would not be the case. 1
ITC JANUARY 2024 SUGGESTED SOLUTION
PAPER 2 QUESTION 1
Paper 2 question 1 6 © SAICA 2024
12 Should the launch go ahead tomorrow, XS Gaming Limited's governing body
will be in breach of Principle 12.13d: 'The governing body should exercise
ongoing oversight of technology and information management and in
particular see that it results in the following: proactive monitoring of
intelligence to identify and respond to incidents, including cyberattacks and
adverse social media events' - given that the new game could result in
security weaknesses on the customers' devices.
1
13 Furthermore, the company's governing body may be in breach of Principle
13, as they are required to ensure compliance with all Laws and Regulations,
yet they will have breached Section 76 of the Companies Act and POPIA. 1
14 In terms of the Triple Context / Six Capitals, XS Gaming Limited's governing
body will not be considering all their stakeholders / not be following a
stakeholder inclusive approach, with various stakeholders ultimately losing
out as a result of the launch. 1
Available 16
Maximum 10
Total for part (c) 10
TOTAL FOR QUESTION 1 50
