Source: SAICA ITC January 2024 — Paper 3 Part II suggested solution (FutureAfrica).
Extracted for internal IAC diagnostic use. SAICA owns these examination documents.

ITC JANUARY 2024 SUGGESTED SOLUTION
PAPER 3 PART II
Paper 3 part II 1 © SAICA 2024
Part (b) Discuss, with reference to the Imagination Beyond purchase price
allocation, whether AE has adequately performed its duties in
accordance with ISA 620 Using the Work of an Auditor’s Expert
with regard to the work carried out by Stephen.
For each matter that has not been performed adequately,
recommend one procedure to be performed by AE to obtain
sufficient appropriate audit evidence with regard to Stephen and
the work carried out by him.
Marks
1. AE should not have limited its procedures to telephonic discussions but
should have agreed in writing (written agreement). (ISA 620.11)
1
AE should have agreed all necessary matters:
• by concluding a written agreement with Stephen, which should have
taken into consideration amongst others the following:
o the nature, scope, and objectives of Stephen’s work;
o the respective roles and responsibilities of AE and Stephen; and
o the nature, timing, and extent of communication between AE and
Stephen, including the form of any reports to be provided by
Stephen.
Max 1
2. There was only a virtual call on the approach and therefore AE did not
evaluate the competence (adequacy) of Stephen as they hired him solely
on the recommendation of Infinite Structures’ financial director. (ISA620.9)
1
AE should have evaluated Stephen’s competency by:
• inspecting copies of Stephen’s qualifications, or membership of a
professional body or industry association, license to practice, or other
forms of external recognition.
• reviewing published papers or books authored (written) or co-authored
by Stephen.
Max 1
3. There was only a virtual call on the approach and therefore AE did not
evaluate the capability of Stephen as they hired him solely on the
recommendation of Infinite Structures’ financial director. (ISA620.9)
1
AE should have evaluated Stephen’s capability by:
• enquiring from / discussing with other auditors or others who are familiar
with Stephen’s work to determine if Stephen has been conducting
purchase price allocations (PPAs), or if this is the first PPA in which he
is involved.
Max 1
4. The fact that Stephen was recommended by Infinite Structures’ financial
director, may possibly indicate that there could be objectivity concerns
(bias, independence, conflict of interest or influence of others) that may
influence Stephen's professional or business judgment that was not
considered by AE. (ISA620.9)
1
AE should have evaluated Stephen’s objectivity, including his
independence, by:
• enquiring from the management of Infinite Structures regarding any
known interests or relationships with Stephen.
• enquiring from / discussing with Stephen regarding any possible interests
and/or relationships that may create threats to Stephen’s objectivity.
• obtaining / inspecting a written representation from Stephen about any
interests or relationships with Infinite Structures of which he is aware.
• discussing with Stephen any relevant safeguards, including any
professional requirements that apply to Stephen.
• evaluating whether the relevant safeguards are adequate to reduce any
possible threats to an acceptable level.
Max 1
ITC JANUARY 2024 SUGGESTED SOLUTION
PAPER 3 PART II
Paper 3 part II 2 © SAICA 2024
5. There was only a virtual call on the approach and therefore AE did not
consider whether Stephen will observe confidentiality as they hired him
solely on the recommendation of Infinite Structures’ financial director.
(ISA620.11(b))
1
AE should have agreed all necessary matters:
• by concluding a written agreement with Stephen which should have
included the responsibility of Stephen to respect the confidentiality of
information about Infinite Structures:
• by concluding a written agreement with Stephen which should have
included the expectations with regard to compliance to the Code of
Professional Conduct.
Max 1
6. No further audit procedures were conducted by AE, apart from an email
received from Stephen in which he listed how the purchase price was to be
allocated to the various identifiable assets and liabilities. It therefore appears
that AE did not evaluate the work performed by Stephan as is required
by ISA620.12 before one can rely on it. (ISA620.12)
1
AE should have evaluated the work performed by Stephen, including his
findings, assumptions, methods, and source data, by performing the
following procedures, for example:
• inspecting Stephen’s working papers to verify the relevance and
reasonableness of the findings and its consistency with other audit
evidence.
• inspecting Stephen’s working papers to verify the relevance and
reasonableness of the assumptions and methods used.
• inspecting Stephen’s working papers to verify the completeness,
relevance and accuracy of the source data used.
• agreeing any calculation with the source data included in the
consolidation calculations to verify the accuracy, completeness, and
relevance of the work.
• comparing the amounts included in the Stephen’s workings to Infinite
Structures’ schedule of calculation of the allocation of the purchase price
and following up on differences through enquiry from management.
• inspecting the formal documentation Stephen used to document his
inputs and which reference where the inputs were derived as well as
other supporting documents (to verify the origin of data used) from for
the auditor to consider the reasonability of the outcomes.
• re-performing the calculation using the inputs used by Stephen to verify
the accuracy thereof.
• assessing whether the method employed by Stephen to perform the
calculation is in line with the acceptable methods in terms of IFRS.
Max 1
7. Based on the matters described above, AE did not adequately perform
its duties.
1
Available 13
Maximum 8
Total for part (b) 8
ITC JANUARY 2024 SUGGESTED SOLUTION
PAPER 3 PART II
Paper 3 part II 3 © SAICA 2024
Part (c) Discuss, with reference to the information in section 3, whether
John’s response on the audit of the Infinite Structures’
consolidation reporting pack is appropriate with respect to
Letsopa.
• Do not provide any details that should be included in the
communication with the component auditor.
Marks
1. AE wants to only rely on the unqualified audit opinion expressed in respect
of the Letsopa separate annual financial statements and the completion of a
checklist, which is not appropriate. The group auditor is responsible for
the group audit and cannot only rely on the unqualified audit opinion
issued by GM, but needs to be involved in the audit process:
• In terms of ISA 600R, AE as the group auditor, is responsible for planning
the audit of the group by establishing the audit strategy (while applying
ISA 300) to determine what specific audit procedures must be performed
for the component, coordination and planning of the work, timetable for
completion of the work, specific group audit requirements. (This also
includes selecting which further audit procedures must be performed.)
(ISA 600R.37)
• For the group auditor to be in a position to select the relevant components
and identify the risk of material misstatement for the consolidated financial
statements and respond appropriately, it should have obtained an
understanding of the group and its environment, the applicable
financial reporting framework and the group’s internal controls. (ISA
600R.30)
• AE did not identify high and significant risk items as well as items
where significant judgment will be required for which further audit
procedures to be performed, which means AE also did not evaluate the
appropriateness of the design and performance of those further audit
procedures.
• No work was done on GM’s work performed and their findings by way
of discussions and reviewing of their working papers as they only
completed the required checklist (which includes supervising the
component auditors and reviewing their work). Consequently, AE’s
response is not appropriate as it is possible the component auditors did
not gather sufficient appropriate audit evidence to reduce audit risk to
an acceptably low level.
• This will result in the audit risk in the consolidated annual financial
statements also not being reduced to an acceptably low level.
1
1
1
1
1
1
2. For AE to be in a position to obtain the necessary understanding of the group
(including the components), the group auditor did not perform the following:
• AE did not confirm with GM that the group auditors will be able to
participate in the work of the component auditor to the extent required
to obtain sufficient and appropriate audit evidence for purposes of the
audit of the consolidated reporting pack of Infinite Structures.
1
3. Reliance on the component auditors (GM)
• Ethical requirements: AE did not obtain an understanding of whether the
component auditor understands and will comply with the ethical
requirements that are relevant to the group audit engagement (including
objectivity / independence).
• Engagement resources: AE should have determined whether GM has
the appropriate competence and capabilities (including sufficient time)
(examples include considering aspects such as membership of
professional organizations and professional bodies, their systems of
1
1
ITC JANUARY 2024 SUGGESTED SOLUTION
PAPER 3 PART II
Paper 3 part II 4 © SAICA 2024
quality management and controls and any IRBA inspection report
findings, etc.).
4. AE failed to interact with the component auditor in the manner prescribed
by ISA 600R – specifically the following:
• AE was not involved in the component auditor’s risk assessment
process to identify significant risks of material misstatement in relation to
the consolidated financial statements.
• AE was not involved in determining the component materiality figures
used in performing the audit and concluding on the audit evidence
gathered in relation to the consolidated financial statements. AE was also
not involved in determining the threshold above which misstatements
cannot be regarded as clearly trivial to the group.
• AE did not communicate its requirements to the component auditor on a
timely basis – covering the work to be performed, the use to be made of
that work, and the form and content of the component auditor’s
communication with the consolidated engagement team.
[Mark awarded for reference to communication and not what communication
shall include as listed in ISA 600R on the basis of the marks].
1
1
1
5. Based on the matters described above, John’s response is not
appropriate.
1
Available 13
Maximum 6
Total for part (c) 6
ITC JANUARY 2024 SUGGESTED SOLUTION
PAPER 3 PART II
Paper 3 part II 5 © SAICA 2024
Part (d) Compile, with reference to section 9, a report to the management of
Imagination Beyond in which you –
• discuss the weaknesses; and
• provide recommendations
with regard to the preparation of the consolidation reporting pack and
reporting process followed by Imagination Beyond to Infinite Structures
Report to Management of Imagination Beyond
Regarding: Consolidated Reporting
Good Day
The following is a report on the weaknesses and recommendations identified in the
preparation of your consolidation reporting pack and group reporting process.
Yours sincerely
ITC candidate
xx January 2024
Weakness Recommendation
1. There is no segregation of duties
as the financial manager prepares
and reviews the financial
information included in the
consolidation reporting packs which
may lead to errors and fraud.
1 There should be adequate segregation
of duties as the financial manager
should not be preparing and reviewing
the financial information included in the
consolidation reporting pack. OR
The financial information should be
prepared by the financial manager and
then reviewed by the CFO or should be
prepared by a financial accountant and
reviewed by the financial manager.
1
The financial manager does not
work directly on the system as
he/she exports the information from
the accounting system to Microsoft
Excel and these amounts can be
adjusted by hand before being
printed and captured, which could
result in unauthorised, invalid or
inaccurate changes being made to
the financial information.
1 The trial balance must be printed
directly from the accounting system to
limit manual intervention and changes
to any trial balance accounts.
1
The financial information is
manually captured in the
consolidation reporting packs,
which could lead to the information
being incorrect, invalid or
incomplete.
1 To limit the risk of the financial
manager making an error, data should
be digitally extracted from the trial
balance and mapped into the
consolidation reporting pack (through
an interface).
1
No one reviews the data in the
consolidation reporting packs that
that the financial manager has
captured, as the information might
be incorrect, invalid or incomplete.
1 A second person should review the
data captured for accuracy,
completeness and validity.
1
2. The trial balance is mapped to the
consolidation reporting packs /
1 The financial manager should consider
any changes from the prior year before
1
ITC JANUARY 2024 SUGGESTED SOLUTION
PAPER 3 PART II
Paper 3 part II 6 © SAICA 2024
financial statements based on the
prior-year mapping and the financial
manager did not consider the
mapping for the 2023 current year-
end (the appropriateness of the
prior year mapping or whether any
changes were necessary / how to
map the new accounts after the
various acquisitions), which may
lead to inaccurate financial
reporting or the misclassification of
accounts.
mapping or there should be guidance
for the mapping of the general ledger
accounts that did not exist in the prior
year.
The financial manager should verify
that all items in the trial balance have
been mapped (completeness) and
mapped to the correct financial
statement line item in the consolidation
reporting pack (accuracy), to ensure
that all changes from the prior year
mapping have been incorporated.
1
The trial balance is mapped
manually without the system, which
may result in errors in the
presentation and disclosures in the
consolidation reporting pack.
1 The system should be updated so that
the trial balance is mapped
automatically through a set
configuration to minimise error in
presentation and disclosure.
1
The financial manager does not
sign off on the consolidation
mapping after done, which may lead
to no one being accountable for the
work performed or the content in the
consolidation reporting pack.
1 The financial manager should sign off
that the mapping was done according
to company policy and accepting
responsibility for the work done.
1
No one reviews the mapping
performed by the financial manager
to ensure that it has been mapped
correctly, which may lead to
inaccurate financial reporting or the
misclassification of accounts.
1 A second person should review and
verify that all items in the trial balance
have been mapped and that it has
been mapped to the correct financial
statement line item in the consolidation
reporting pack.
1
3. All outstanding balances and
transactions with other subsidiaries
are confirmed telephonically which
means there is no reliable evidence
of confirmation in terms of ISA500.
1 A confirmation template should be
completed between the entities
confirming the transactions and
outstanding balances in order to have
sufficient and appropriate evidence in
terms of ISA500.
Internal controls should be put in place
to identify other subsidiary transactions
and balances (e.g., by flagging them in
the system), to ensure that
transactions with other subsidiaries are
identified and accounted for purposes
of elimination on consolidation.
1
1
The financial manager does not
follow up on differences in amounts
after confirming the outstanding
balances and transactions, result in
errors in the presentation and
disclosures in the consolidation
reporting pack.
1 The financial manager must
investigate and follow up any
differences identified in the
outstanding balances and transactions
to ensure the consolidation reporting
pack is valid, accurate and complete.
1
The financial manager assumes he
is correct without performing
reconciliations and follow-ups to
1 The financial manager must reconcile
all errors with the other entities rather
than assuming his amount is correct.
1
ITC JANUARY 2024 SUGGESTED SOLUTION
PAPER 3 PART II
Paper 3 part II 7 © SAICA 2024
identify and correct the errors
between the subsidiaries, which the
consolidation reporting pack might
include inaccurate amounts.
The financial manager authorises
the reversal of intercompany
balances and transactions and does
not treat it as consolidation entries,
which may lead to amounts not
appropriately eliminated, as such
reversal might be recognised in
another type of account, such as a
suspense account.
1 Intercompany transactions and
balances should be eliminated at
consolidation level in Infinite Structure
and not in the financial statements of
Imagination Beyond.
At group level there needs to be clear
communications / training must be
provided on the procedures on what
must be eliminated / not eliminated,
before the information is sent.
1
1
There is no segregation of duties as
the financial manager confirms the
accuracy of the transactions and
outstanding balances and he/she
also authorises the outstanding
balances, which may lead to errors
and fraud.
1 There should be adequate segregation
of duties as the financial manager
should not be confirming and
authorising the transactions and
outstanding balances included in the
consolidation reporting pack. OR
The transactions and outstanding
balances should be prepared by the
financial manager and then authorised
by the CFO or should be confirmed by
a financial accountant and authorised
by the financial manager.
1
4. The consolidation reporting pack
is sent via email, and it is not
encrypted, or password protected
which may lead to the email being
be altered or intercepted.
1 The consolidation reporting pack
should be encrypted, sent via a
secured server and should be
password protected.
1
5. No checks regarding the
completeness of all data fields, are
performed to ensure that totals
transfers accurately from notes to
the primary statements and/or
balance sheet balances, which may
result in errors in the presentation
and disclosures in the consolidation
reporting pack.
1 Checks need to be incorporated that
validates that all required fields are
filled / data elements are present and
populated (e.g. mandatory field /
missing data check).
Any incomplete datasets that are
flagged by the checks, should be
followed up with the finance team.
1
1
6. There are no formal documented
company policies and procedures
that should be followed regarding
the consolidation process to
minimise the risk of inaccurate,
incomplete or invalid information.
1 There should be a company policy
setting out the consolidation
procedures and these should be
regularly reviewed and updated as
necessarily.
1
Available 36
Maximum 14
Communication skills – appropriate style; layout and structure 2
Total for part (d) 16
ITC JANUARY 2024 SUGGESTED SOLUTION
PAPER 3 PART II
Paper 3 part II 8 © SAICA 2024
Part (e) Discuss, supported by calculations, the normal tax
consequences for Imagination Beyond arising from the loan
received from HBCS Bank and the interest paid to HBCS Bank for
the year of assessment ended 31 December 2023.
• Ignore withholding tax.
• Ignore the provisions of the double tax agreements between
South Africa and China and South Africa and the United
Kingdom.
MARKS
Normal tax
In terms of s 24J(2), the issuer of an instrument will be allowed a deduction for
interest if the interest is incurred in the carrying on of a trade and is in the
production of the income. Instrument means any interest-bearing arrangement
or debt. Issuer, in relation to any instrument, means any person who has incurred
any interest or has any obligation to repay any amount in terms of such
instrument.
Imagination Beyond’s loan from HBCS Bank is an interest-bearing
arrangement and is therefore an instrument as defined.
Imagination Beyond incurred interest on the loan and has an obligation to
repay the loan to HBCS Bank on 30 June 2023. Therefore, Imagination Beyond
is the issuer of an instrument.
1
1
Imagination Beyond is carrying on a trade in the construction industry and
used the loan to finance the construction of its warehouse to be used in its trade.
The warehouse is used for storage and distribution, which is part of its
process for earning income. The interest is therefore incurred in the production
of the income.
1
1
Therefore, the interest incurred on the loan is deductible in terms of s24J(2). 1P
In terms of s24J, the interest will be apportioned for the accrual period (1 January
2023 – 30 June 2023) during the 2023 year of assessment:
GBP500 000 x 6,75% x 181/365 = GBP16 736
It is assumed that the market-related interest rate of 6,75% is the same as the
yield to maturity rate.
1
1
As Imagination Beyond is a company, the interest is translated at the spot
rate on the day it was incurred in terms of s25D(1).
Alternative: s24J deems interest to be incurred on a daily basis, therefore
the average exchange rate is used to translate the interest as a proxy for the
daily exchange rate.
1
Therefore, the interest deductible in terms of s24J(2) is GBP16 736 x R24,40 =
R408 366 based on the spot rate on 30 June 2023.
Alternative: Therefore, the interest deductible in terms of s24J(2) is GBP16 736
x R22,89 = R383 087 based on the average exchange rate for 1 January 2023
– 30 June 2023.
1
ITC JANUARY 2024 SUGGESTED SOLUTION
PAPER 3 PART II
Paper 3 part II 9 © SAICA 2024
In terms of s24I(1), exchange item means an amount in a foreign currency owing
by that person in respect of a debt incurred by such person
Imagination Beyond holds debt (loan and interest payable) denominated in
GBP, which are exchange items.
In terms of s24I(2), because Imagination Beyond is a company, s24I will apply
to all its exchange items.
1
1
No exchange difference arises in FY2023 in respect of the interest incurred
from 1 January 2023 – 30 June 2023 because the spot rate on the date it was
incurred (30 June 2023) is the same as the spot rate on the realisation date.
Alternative: An exchange loss of R25 271 [GBP16 736 x (R24,40 - R22,89)]
arises in FY2023 on realisation date in respect of the interest incurred from 1
January 2023 – 30 June 2023, which is deductible [P].
1
FY2022 interest payable would have been translated at the spot rate of R20.49
on 31 December 2022 (year-end) for the accrual period 1 July 2022 – 31
December 2022 and a further exchange difference arises when the interest
is settled on 30 June 2023.
An exchange loss of R66 524 (GBP500 000 x 6,75% x 184/365 = GBP17 014
x (R24,40 – R20,49 = R3,91) is deducted from income
1
1P
On 31 December 2022 (year-end) the loan would have been translated at the
sport rate of R20.49 and a further exchange difference arises when the loan
is settled on 30 June 2023.
An exchange loss of R1 955 000 [GBP500 000 x (R24,40 – R20,49)] is
deducted from income.
1
1P
Available 16
Maximum 11
Communication skills – logical argument 1
Total for part (e) 12
ITC JANUARY 2024 SUGGESTED SOLUTION
PAPER 3 PART II
Paper 3 part II 10 © SAICA 2024
Part (f) Discuss, with reference to relevant case law, whether Imagination
Beyond may deduct the management fee and local shareholder
contribution fee in terms of section 11(a) of the Income Tax Act
for the year of assessment ended 31 December 2023.
Marks
All the requirements of s11(a) read together with s23(g) must be met for an
amount to be deductible. The issues to specifically address here are whether the
management fees and local shareholder contribution fees are incurred ‘in the
production of the income’ for Imagination Beyond and ‘not of a capital
nature’. As the terms ‘in the production of income’ a‘d 'capi’al' are not defined in
the Income Tax Act, case law should be referred to for guidance.
½
½
In Port Elizabeth Electric Tramway Co Ltd v CIR it was held that expenditure is
incurred ‘in the production of the income’ where the expense is closely
connected to the income-earning activities of the business. 1
In New State Areas Ltd v CIR, it was held that expenditure relating to the
income-earning structure is of a capital in nature and not deductible.
Whereas expenditure relating to the income-earning operations (activities) is
not of a capital nature and is deductible.
Alternative:
In BP Southern Africa (Pty) Ltd v CSARS it was held that where an expenditure
does not create an enduring benefit, it is not capital in nature and is
deductible.
1
In the production of the income
It is submitted that the services provided by Future Afrika (technical and
management services) and the local shareholder contribution fee are closely
related to Imagination Beyond’s income-earning activities, as it relates to
the construction industry (building materials, restoration of historical
buildings and government infrastructure tenders) and Imagination Beyond
operates in the construction industry.
½
½
Regarding the local shareholder contribution fees, the principle from the Warner
Lambert SA (Pty) Ltd v CSARS applies because the fees are incurred to ensure
that Imagination Beyond does not lose out on possible earnings from
government contracts. The fees are therefore incurred in the production of
income.
1B
Not of a capital nature
The management fees and local shareholder contribution fee are incurred as
part of normal operations, not to create, improve or add to the income
earning structure of Imagination Beyond.
Alternative:
The management fees and local shareholder contribution fee are incurred on
an annual basis to enable Imagination Beyond to earn income from its
construction and infrastructure development activities and therefore do not
create an enduring benefit.
½
½
Management fees
As Imagination Beyond is a company, the CNY1 million will be translated to ZAR
by applying the spot rate in terms of s25D(1) on 15 December 2023. Therefore,
the total expense amounts to ZAR2 742 200 (CNY1 million x R2,7422).
Note to markers: the mark is awarded for the application of s25D(1).
1B
The invoice relates to the services rendered to the entire Infinite Structures
group. However, Imagination Beyond may only deduct R1 645 320
(R2 742 200 x 60%) of the management fees for the 2023 year of assessment
in terms of s23(g), as that is the portion relating to Imagination Beyond’s trade.
1
ITC JANUARY 2024 SUGGESTED SOLUTION
PAPER 3 PART II
Paper 3 part II 11 © SAICA 2024
Local shareholder contribution fee
As the local shareholder contribution fee only relates to Imagination Beyond,
Imagination Beyond may deduct the R3 500 000 (100%) of the local
shareholder contribution fee in terms of s11(a) during the 2023 year of
assessment.
1
The burden of proof rests with Imagination Beyond (the taxpayer) to prove
that the management fee and local shareholder contribution fee are deductible
for normal tax purposes in terms of s102 of the Tax Administration Act. 1
Available 10
Maximum 8
Total for part (f) 8
TOTAL FOR PART II 50
