Source: SAICA ITC January 2024 — Paper 1 question (Dentout).
Extracted for internal IAC diagnostic use. SAICA owns these examination documents.

Paper 1 1 (of 7) © SAICA 2024
QUESTION 100 marks
Ignore value-added tax
1 Background
DentOut (Pty) Ltd (‘DentOut’) is a panel-beating business owned by the 32-year-old twin
siblings, Michaela and Marcello Panelli. They are the only directors of the company. Michaela
Panelli is a CA(SA) and full-time audit manager at a large audit firm named Confidence
Assurance Inc. (‘CAI’). Marcello is a qualified panel beater who takes care of the day-to-day
operations of DentOut on a full-time basis.
Each sibling is entitled to an equal share of the after-tax profits of the business, and they re-
invest at least 25% of these profits each year. In addition, Marcello draws a market-related
monthly salary for the management of the business. The Panelli siblings work well together
and decisions regarding the business are made after conversations at family gatherings. They
are proud of the steady growth of the business which they started from scratch in Marcello’s
home garage.
DentOut now employs 30 operational and administrative staff and has a loyal customer base.
The company has shown a steady increase in growth since incorporation in 2016 and is
attracting the attention of larger companies who wish to share in the success of DentOut.
One such group is Regal Vehicle Rentals (Pty) Ltd (‘RVR’), a large car rental group that was
established in 2001 and has operations throughout South Africa. RVR would like to acquire a
controlling interest in DentOut.
Following preliminary engagements between DentOut and RVR, RVR appointed a local
corporate finance specialist company, CorpTru Inc. (‘CorpTru’) to perform a high-level due
diligence of DentOut prior to deciding whether it wanted to purchase a stake in DentOut.
The following is an extract of the summary of the findings of CorpTru:
Due diligence report (extract)
DentOut (Pty) Ltd
Regal Vehicle Rentals (Pty) Ltd Executive Team
Compiled by CorpTru Inc.
1 October 2023
Background of company
DentOut rents premises in an industrial park in Johannesburg for use as a workshop and
storeroom. DentOut currently does not have an ISO accreditation1 and therefore does not
attract business from any of the major insurers or motor manufacturers. Customers are
typically individuals and businesses who do not have insurance cover, or prefer not to involve
insurers. The Panellis are of the view that the King IV Report on Corporate Governance is
only applicable to listed companies and that would not really be of benefit to a small
company.
1 ISO accreditation refers to compliance with quality and safety benchmarks set by the International Organisation
for Standardisation.
Paper 1 2 (of 7) © SAICA 2024
The current reporting period is for the financial year ended 30 September 2023 (FY2023).
Michaela stated that, in her opinion, DentOut complies with International Financial Reporting
Standards (IFRS) and is currently only required to have an independent review of its financial
statements.
Operating and financial information systems
DentOut operates a very basic off-the-shelf financial record-keeping system supported by
Microsoft Excel spreadsheets, with limited internal controls.
The finance team currently consists of –
• a bookkeeper who oversees the data-capturing process and basic reconciliations;
• a debtors clerk who deals with all sales-related matters, follows up on outstanding
debt, and keeps related accounting registers and files in order; and
• a creditors clerk who assists Marcello with ordering parts, keeping track of debt owed
to suppliers, and keeps related accounting registers and files in order.
Michaela prepares DentOut’s annual financial statements, tax calculations and all tax
returns. She submits the annual returns to the Companies and Intellectual Property
Commission. Marcello manages all operations and staff-related matters.
The majority of transactions at DentOut are cash based. No accurate inventory movement
records are kept. There are two types of inventories – new inventory and reconditioned /
used inventory. The reconditioned spares and parts (inventory) are not accounted for in the
accounting records since these are either obtained at a Rnil cost or a marginal cost. The fair
value of these reconditioned / used spares and parts was estimated to be R1,83 million as
at 30 September 2023. Stock counts are carried out at the end of each month for all new
spares and parts kept in the DentOut storeroom, which is located at the same premises as
the workshop. The appointed independent reviewer attends the stock count at year end and
its working papers are available for audit purposes.
Extract from the trial balance as at 30 September 2023
Notes R
Machinery and equipment 1 11 130 000
Inventory: New spares and parts 5 950 000
Inventory: Reconditioned / used spares and parts 2 20 000
Debtors 3 3 000 000
Bank and cash 3 500 000
Suppliers: 15-day credit terms (6 500 000)
Accruals 4 (950 000)
Notes
1 This includes a significant number of items that have been fully depreciated, but which
are still in use. Management has not re-assessed the useful lives of these items since
acquisition.
2 Most of the items were obtained at a marginal / Rnil cost price as they were obtained
from scrapyards or tow-truck companies.
3 Payment terms: 70% cash deposit and the remaining 30% of the contract price
payable within 30 days.
4 Accruals include insurance and one month’s rent outstanding. Management
recognises rental expenses as invoices are received and has not considered IFRS 16
Leases.
Paper 1 3 (of 7) © SAICA 2024
Additional material findings
1 Faulty reconditioned spares
The due diligence team identified instances where DentOut may have been using
reconditioned or used parts in repairs but charged customers for new parts. One such
instance relates to Ms Mandy Mondi, a driver who died in a car accident in August 2023.
According to the Mondi family, DentOut replaced the brakes, steering system and the
accelerator pedal of Mandy’s vehicle during the first week of July 2023. A mechanic friend
of the Mondi family assessed Mandy’s wrecked vehicle and cited the cause of the accident
as driving with worn-out brakes that had reached the end of their useful life.
The Mondi family further informed CorpTru that Mandy’s father had spoken to Marcello
Panelli on 4 August 2023 about the accident and reprimanded him for allowing DentOut
employees to replace Mandy’s brakes with old worn-out brakes. Marcello allegedly insisted
that DentOut would not take responsibility for Mandy’s reckless driving and insinuated that
Mandy must have been under the influence of alcohol. The Mondi family showed CorpTru
legal documents about a lawsuit they had filed against DentOut for loss of life. The lawsuit
was filed on 25 August 2023 and DentOut received notification of the lawsuit on
27 August 2023. The Mondi family has also taken the matter to Blanche Carte, a popular
South African investigative journalism television programme, which aired an episode on the
matter in October 2023.
CorpTru conducted a background search on DentOut on the internet and identified reviews
on Google and Hellopeter2 that stated that several previous DentOut clients had claimed that
DentOut fit reconditioned parts to vehicles and charged the customers for new parts. These
reviews state that Marcello refused to acknowledge their claims and they are therefore going
‘to follow a legal route’. No lawsuits have arisen from these allegations at the date of this
report.
CorpTru met with the RVR inhouse legal team to discuss these allegations and the claim
from the Mondi family. They informed CorpTru that after a detailed internal review of vehicle
repair and job card records it appears more likely than not that some instances exist where
reconditioned parts were used by the repair technicians.
The legal team however regard the possibility of legal action against DentOut being
successful to be remote. The onus is on the claimants to prove their allegations beyond a
reasonable doubt, which will be difficult.
The legal team estimates that total successful claims that could possibly arise from the
allegations (including the Mondi family’s claim) would amount to no more than R2,5 million.
In addition, legal fees are expected to amount to R900 000.
These cost estimates were reflected in the final determination of the purchase price offered
by RVR.
2 Intangible asset treatment
The due diligence team identified that DentOut purchased four digital dent pullers
(‘machinery’) at a cost of R825 000 each for the first time on 1 October 2021. DentOut also
incurred total costs of R2 555 000 on software that enables the digital dent pullers to connect
2 Hellopeter is an internet-based platform on which consumers can complement or complain about services or
products that they purchase from businesses.
Paper 1 4 (of 7) © SAICA 2024
to the main car body repair system of the shop. Inspection of the fixed asset register showed
that the software costs were capitalised to the digital dent pullers. The software installed is
not integral to the digital dent pullers.
DentOut considered the digital dent pullers to have a total useful life of five years with a
residual value of R100 000 each.
3 Income tax
CorpTru noted that the company aggressively attempts to keep income tax payable as low
as possible.
2 Proposed Regal Vehicle Rental transaction
RVR representatives discussed its intention to buy a controlling interest in DentOut with
Michaela and Marcello. Subsequently, the parties entered into a non-disclosure agreement
regarding all aspects of the negotiations. RVR then provided the two with a summary of the
due diligence findings and indicated that before the deal can go through, it would like Michaela
and Marcello’s response to the findings.
RVR also had the following requirements that DentOut needed to fulfil:
1 DentOut must ensure that it is fully compliant with IFRS as this will simplify the
consolidation process for the RVR Group financial statements because RVR is fully
compliant with IFRS.
2 To enhance the credibility of its financial information, DentOut must adopt the
recommended practices of the KING IV Report on Corporate Governance.
3 DentOut must implement a strong internal controls system.
4 DentOut must adopt a technology-based integrated information system to manage its
operations and finances.
5 Although DentOut will remain a separate legal entity after the take-over, its
Memorandum of Incorporation (MoI) must be amended to include a provision that
DentOut’s financial statements are subject to an external audit. An audit will be required
for the FY2023 financial statements.
RVR is due to rotate auditing firms soon in terms of the MoI of the parent company and would
prefer the audit firm that audits DentOut to also become the auditors of RVR and the RVR
Group. For this reason, RVR requested that a large audit firm be considered.
Both Michaela and Marcello were open to the idea of a buy-out, as it would create further
growth potential for DentOut. Michaela shared RVR’s intention and requests with the
managing partner at Confidence Assurance Inc. The managing partner suggested that
Michaela do as much as possible to ensure that CAI was awarded the contract for the audit
and other services of DentOut; he also indicated that Michaela would be well rewarded if she
could bring in work from the RVR Group.
Michaela then recommended that CAI be awarded the DentOut audit contract to the RVR
representatives, should the two parties go ahead with the deal. She noted that CAI was one
of the largest auditing and advisory firms in South Africa and had offices in seven provinces.
Its head office is located in Johannesburg. Mr Jack Hammer would be nominated as the audit
partner.
Paper 1 5 (of 7) © SAICA 2024
In addition, she recommended that to reduce the DentOut separate financial statement audit
fee, CAI be awarded the contract for the following services:
• Design of a new internal control and information system for DentOut;
• Assistance with the selection or design of an integrated information technology system;
• Formalisation of board structures and committees; and
• Provision of tax planning and structuring advice.
The representatives of RVR agreed to Michaela’s recommendations since they were keen for
the deal to go ahead.
3 Offer to purchase a controlling stake in the business
As part of RVR’s strategic ambitions, the RVR Board of directors contemplates creating value
for shareholders by investing in a company that aligns with the growth of the group through its
car rental companies. RVR believes that the proposed transaction to acquire a controlling
interest in DentOut would align with the group strategy as DentOut will become the preferred
repairer of car rental vehicles within the RVR Group.
The Panelli twins received a non-binding offer from RVR on 10 October 2023. In terms of the
offer, RVR would acquire a controlling interest of 51% in DentOut by subscribing for new
shares for a total cash consideration of R11 million. In addition to the information provided in
section 2, the following conditions were stipulated in the offer letter:
1 Michaela and Marcello must continue to be involved in the day-to-day operations of
DentOut.
2 The R11 million purchase consideration will be invested in the business specifically to
obtain ISO quality accreditation.
3 Michaela and Marcello must oversee the ISO quality accreditation process and
upgrades to equipment.
4 Should the ISO quality accreditation not be achieved, the investment in DentOut will be
converted into a loan, which will have to be repaid to RVR.
5 All branding related to DentOut must be removed and replaced with RVR branding.
4 Valuation of DentOut
Michaela wanted to get her own estimates for the upcoming negotiations with representatives
from RVR. She therefore asked a trusted friend and colleague from the corporate finance
division of CAI to perform an initial valuation of DentOut. Michaela’s colleague analysed the
historic financial results of the company and discussed trends in the motor and panel-beating
industry with Michaela and Marcello.
Marcello explained that plant and equipment incorporating artificial intelligence technologies
are now being used more widely in the automotive industry. However, given Marcello’s view
that ‘nothing can replace the good old machinery at DentOut’, only maintenance capital
expenditure was incorporated into the valuation.
Michaela paid R25 000 directly to her colleague for the valuation services that the colleague
rendered in his free time. An extract of the valuation workings, which are arithmetically
accurate, is presented in table 1.
Paper 1 6 (of 7) © SAICA 2024
Table 1: Extract of valuation workings
Valuation: DentOut (Pty) Ltd
Prepared for: Michaela and Marcello Panelli
Valuation as at 30 September 2023
Present value of free cash flows to the company R'000
Forecast period 5 841
Terminal value 20 120
Value of operations 25 961
Add: Excess cash 22
Less: Debt (352)
25 631
Control premium (25%) 6 408
Value of equity 32 039
Notes
• No additional costs relating to RVR’s conditions as stipulated in the offer letter were
incorporated in the valuation.
• No implications of the potential settlement of claims from disgruntled customers were
included in the valuation.
5 Vehicle refurbishment project from RVR
RVR recently reached an agreement with a financial services company, Ride Finance (Pty)
Ltd (‘RideFin’), which provides finance to Uber drivers for four-seater sedan vehicles. Due to
poor economic conditions, many RideFin clients have been defaulting on their loan
repayments. As a result, RideFin has had to repossess an increasing number of vehicles that
were offered as security for loans.
In terms of the agreement between RVR and RideFin, RideFin will sell the vehicles to RVR at
a discounted rate for the next year because these vehicles are in a good condition and would
have recorded mileage of less than 10 000 km. RVR plans to use the vehicles for rentals. RVR
has approached DentOut to refurbish the vehicles so that they will be appealing as rental
vehicles. Marcello believes that if DentOut impresses RVR with the quality of its work on this
project, Michaela would be able to justify a greater valuation for DentOut in the ongoing
purchase negotiations.
The contract for refurbishments between RVR and DentOut would be for a period of one year
from the date of the agreement. It is estimated that 26 vehicles will need to be refurbished by
DentOut at a fee of R25 500 per vehicle.
A recent inventory count revealed that DentOut already has many items required for the
vehicle refurbishments on hand. However, other items would need to be purchased from
DentOut’s suppliers.
1 Spray paint
Spray paint for the refurbishments is available in several colours in DentOut’s inventory
warehouse. The spray-paint cylinders (1 litre each) were purchased for R400 per cylinder as
the paint is used for day-to-day repairs by DentOut. The current retail price of the paint is R500
per cylinder. Each vehicle will require half a cylinder of paint.
Paper 1 7 (of 7) © SAICA 2024
2 Leather
The refurbishment would involve re-upholstering the seats with soft leather and 20 m2 of
leather will be required for each vehicle. The leather would need to be purchased from a
supplier in Cape Town at a cost of R650 per m2. In addition, a fixed delivery charge of R6 250
would be payable for a consignment of 300 m2 of leather. Thereafter there would be an
additional delivery cost of R1 800 for every 100 m2 of leather (or part thereof) purchased.
3 Generator
Marcello is concerned that loadshedding could cause delays in completing the vehicle
refurbishments. A neighbouring business has recently begun leasing industrial generators.
Marcello asked one of its salespersons to conduct an evaluation of the back-up power
requirements for the refurbishment project. The cost of the evaluation service was R1 500.
The salesperson established that the PowerUP900 portable generator would be most suitable.
If DentOut accepts the refurbishment project, Marcello plans to lease the portable generator
at a fixed cost of R7 000 per month, including fuel.
4 Labour
Semi-skilled workers will carry out the work required for the refurbishments. These workers
can be hired as required at a rate of R300 per day. Each vehicle refurbishment will require
12 days of labour from one worker in total.
6 Additional information
• Software is measured on the cost model in terms of IAS 38 Intangible Assets over a
useful life of three years with no residual value.
• Computer equipment is measured on the cost model in terms of IAS 16 Property, Plant
and Equipment.
• The South African Revenue Service grants a wear-and-tear allowance on the digital dent
pullers on a straight-line basis over five years and three years for the related software.
• A tax rate of 27% applies to all applicable years of assessment.
• All amounts are regarded as material.
Paper 1 part I required 1 (of 1) © SAICA 2024
INITIAL TEST OF COMPETENCE, JANUARY 2024
PROFESSIONAL PAPER 1
This paper consists of two parts.
Answer each part in a separate answer book.
PAPER 1 PART I – REQUIRED
Marks
Sub-
total Total
(a) Discuss the key matters that the Panelli siblings should consider prior
to accepting the buy-out offer from RVR, with regard to –
(i) the impact for DentOut on its operations and growth; and
(ii) considerations for the siblings as the existing shareholders.
• Ignore taxation.
• Do not discuss any ethical matters.
• Calculations are not required.
Communication skills for part (a)(i) – logical argument
14
8
1 23
(b) Determine, with reference to the percentage margin of safety,
whether DentOut should accept the vehicle refurbishment project
from RVR in section 5.
• Ignore taxation.
12
12
(c) Discuss the appropriate accounting treatment arising from the faulty
reconditioned spares in note 1 of the ‘additional material findings’ in
the due diligence report in the –
o separate financial statements of DentOut for FY2023; and
o at acquisition consolidated financial statements of RVR, on the
assumption that RVR acquired a controlling interest in DentOut
on 1 October 2023.
• Do not discuss presentation and disclosure.
• Do not discuss any implications of IAS 2 Inventories.
• Do not discuss any implications of IAS 7 Statement of Cash
Flows.
8
8
(d) Prepare the prior-period error note in the separate financial
statements of DentOut for FY2023 relating to the software described
in the due diligence report.
• Assume that the tax was correctly treated in the income tax
return.
• Assume all amounts are material.
Communication skills – presentation
10
1 11
Total for part I 54
Paper 1 part II required 1 (of 1) © SAICA 2024
INITIAL TEST OF COMPETENCE, JANUARY 2024
PROFESSIONAL PAPER 1
This paper consists of two parts.
Answer each part in a separate answer book.
PAPER 1 PART II – REQUIRED
Marks
Sub-
total Total
(e) Discuss, with reference to the information provided in sections 1 and
2, any ethical threats and concerns you may have regarding the
behaviour and actions of Michaela.
• Do not discuss the significance of any threat.
• Do not provide any safeguards.
Communication skills – logical argument
12
1 13
(f) Discuss, with reference to the information provided in sections 1 and
2, factors that Jack Hammer needs to consider in deciding whether
to accept the audit engagement of DentOut.
• Exclude any discussion related to the ethical conduct of
Marcello and Michaela.
• Do not discuss the significance of threats.
• Do not provide any safeguards.
Communication skills – clarity of expression
22
1 23
(g) Discuss, with reference to the extract of the trial balance provided
in section 1, the substantive procedures on the opening balances
that can be performed to confirm the existence of DentOut’s assets
as at 1 October 2022.
Communication skills – clarity of expression
9
1 10
Total for part II 46
TOTAL FOR PAPER 1 100
