Source: SAICA CA of the Future — B. Entry Level Competency Framework (approved 21 April 2026).
Extracted for internal IAC diagnostic use. SAICA owns this competency framework.

CA(SA)
COMPETENCY FRAMEWORK
“CA of the Future”
B. ENTRY LEVEL COMETENCY FRAMEWORK
This document must be read together with the following documents:
• A. The Preface document;
• C. Guidance on the Content, Development and Assessment of Competencies in
the Academic Programme;
• D. Guidance on the Content, Development and Assessment of Competencies in
the SAICA Training Programme;
• E. Guidance on the Initial Assessment of Competence (IAC); and
• F. Guidance on the Professional Programme and the Assessment of Professional
Competence (APC); and
• Appendix 1. Detailed competencies setting out the learning outcomes for the
Professional Values Attitudes and Acumens (PVAAs) and the Technical
competencies at point of entry
•
Copyright, Proprietary Rights and Permitted Use
© The South African Institute of Chartered Accountants (SAICA). All rights reserved.
This Competency Framework constitutes proprietary intellectual property and professional
know-how of SAICA. It has been developed and is maintained as part of SAICA’s mandate
to uphold the quality, integrity, and high professional standards of the Chartered Accountant
profession, which underpin public confidence and the value and attractiveness of SAICA
membership and designation.
Access to, or use of, this Competency Framework does not confer any right, licence, or
interest in the intellectual property contained herein. Except where expressly permitted by
SAICA in writing, no part of this Framework may be copied, reproduced, adapted, published,
distributed, or used for commercial, quasi-commercial, or third-party standard-setting
purposes.
This Framework may be used solely for legitimate educational, regulatory, or professional
purposes, in a manner that preserves its integrity, acknowledges SAICA as the owner and
source, and does not undermine SAICA’s role as custodian of professional standards or
dilute the value associated with SAICA membership and designation.
Any authorised access to or use of this Competency Framework is subject to, and must be
exercised in accordance with, SAICA’s Intellectual Property Management Policy, as
amended from time to time.

Version control
V1 14 January
2021 Document presented to Combined academic workgroup 18 January 2020
V2
24 January
2021
Reflects changes effected by the Combined Academic and Training
Workgroups 18 January 2020.
Approved IPDC: 4 February 2021
V3
15 February
2026
• Renamed – CA of the Future
• Includes updates to the updates that were made to the CA of the Future
Competency Framework, and approved by the CA Professional
Development Committee (CAPDC) in October 2023
• Reflects changes effected by the Combined Academic and Training
Workgroups from 2021 to October 2025
• Changes made based on a review of the technical sections A, B3 and C
(excluding Tax strategy) in order to reduce syllabus overload
• Alignment of verbs and proficiency levels
• Some other minor changes effected in other section (PVAAs)
Approved CAPDC: 21 April 2026 (Appendix 1 was approved on the 3rd
December 2026- Applicable to IAC 2027)
Acronyms
AGA(SA) Associate General Accountant (South Africa)
APC Assessment of Professional Competencies
CA(SA) Chartered Accountant (South Africa)
CAPDC Chartered Accountant Professional Development committee
CHE Council for Higher Education
HEQSF Higher Education Quality Sub-Framework
HEQC Higher Education Quality Council
HEI Higher Education Institutions (encompassing both Public and Private
institutes)
IAC Initial Assessment of Competence: Formerly known as the Initial Test of
Competence (ITC)
IPD Initial Professional Development
NQF National Qualifications Framework
PGDA Postgraduate Diploma in Accounting (PGDA): A SAICA endorsed PGDA or an
equivalent qualification
PP Professional Programme
PVA Professional values and attitudes
PVAA Professional values, attributes and Acumens (Enabling competencies)
SAQA South African Qualifications Authority
SAICA The South African Institute of Chartered Accountants

INDEX
A. INTRODUCTION 1
B. THE SAICA COMPETENCY FRAMEWORK SUITE OF DOCUMENTS 3
C. COMPONENTS OF THE COMPETENCY FRAMEWORK 4
D. DEFINING CAs AT ENTRY POINT TO THE PROFESSION, AND BEYOND 6
E. COMPETENCY PROFICIENCY LEVELS 10
F. OUTCOME OF THE COMPETENCY FRAMEWORK 15
1. PROFESSIONAL VALUES AND ATTITUDES
I Ethics values and attitudes 17
II Citizenship attitudes and values 17
III Lifelong learning attitudes and values 18
2. ENABLING COMPETENCIES
W Digital acumen 21
X Relational acumen 22
Y Decision making acumen 22
Z Business Acumen 23
3. TECHNICAL COMPETENCIES IN THE VALUE CREATION PROCESS 24
Area 1 A. Strategy and governance to create sustainable value 27
Area 2 B. Stewardship of capitals: business processes and risk management 29
Area 3 C. Decision-making to increase, decrease or transform capitals 30
Area 4 D. Reporting on value creation 32
Area 5 E. Tax Governance and Compliance 32
Area 6 F. Assurance and related services 32
APPENDIX 1: PVAA AND TECHNICAL COMPETENCIES AND DETAIL OUTCOMES
ACROSS THE VARIOUS PROGRAMMES LINK
APPENDIX 2: GLOSSARY OF TERMS 35
1

A. INTRODUCTION
This document should be read after “A. Preface” as that document sets out to identify and describe the
components of and concepts used in the development of the Competency Framework for Entry-Level Chartered
Accountants (SA) (CAs(SA)) and its related guidance documents.
For the purposes of the competency framework and as documented in Section E of the Preface, Chartered
Accountants1 are defined as:
Responsible leaders2 who behave ethically and create sustainable value for a wide range of stakeholders
within an organisation. Using integrated thinking to interpret, analyse and evaluate financial and non-financial
information. This enables them to influence others, and together, make impactful decisions thereby
contributing meaningfully to the economy and to society.
CAs(SA) are able to enter into a wide range of different roles and occupations post registering as a CA(SA) and
the underlying qualification process is designed to prepare CAs(SA), who undertake relevant an ongoing
continuous profession development (CPD), to enter a wide range of roles within business and the public sector.
The primary role of an entry level CA(SA) is to prepare relevant, reliable and meaningful information for
stakeholders and to interpret, analyse and evaluate such information for impactful decision-making. Meaningful
financial and non-financial information has integrity, is relevant, accurate and useful for impactful decision-
making.
CAs(SA) at point of entry, in addition to being able to demonstrate technical competence, should also
demonstrate ethical behaviour, and acumens related to decision making, a broad understanding of business, be
digitally fluent and demonstrate human centred skills. The combination of this is professional competence.
This definition is expanded on further in Section D of this document to include the definition of an “at entry”
Chartered accountant.
The competency framework identifies and describes the professional competencies (professional values and
attitudes, enabling competencies and technical competencies) that a CA should demonstrate at entry point to
the profession. The competency framework provides a reference point for current and prospective CAs,
employers and the public, thus enabling a clear understanding of the foundational professional competencies
the CA is able to demonstrate as he/she embarks upon their career. The competency framework also provides
the base upon which the education, training, professional and assessment programmes of SAICA are
developed and delivered.
Foundational professional competencies developed at point of entry can be refined to support specialist roles
after entering the CA profession. As lifelong learners, CAs need to undertake relevant continuing professional
development (CPD) activities to achieve competence for post-qualification roles. CPD activities that take place
after entering the CA profession have the purpose of ensuring practitioners maintain and develop the
competencies required to continue to perform their roles competently.
1 Chartered Accountants referred to in this document are those registered at the South African Institute of Chartered Accountants
(SAICA).
2 Responsible leadership applies not to one’s level of seniority or title within an organisation, but rather to the ability to make a difference
to those around you. (#difference makers)
2

The competency framework not only serves SAICA, which strives to be regarded as the pre-eminent professional
accounting body in South Africa, but is also a building block in the qualification paths of registered auditors and
tax practitioners. SAICA is accredited by the Independent Regulatory Board for Auditors (IRBA) and this enables
registration as a Registered Auditor (RA) for those SAICA members with the appropriate auditing training (i.e.,
completion of the Audit Development Programme3). SAICA is also recognised as a professional body by the
South African Revenue Service (SARS), which enables its members to register as tax practitioners.
3 Please refer to the IRBA website for more information on the Audit Development Programme
3

B. SAICA COMPETENCY FRAMEWORK SUITE OF DOCUMENTS
• Sets out the
• components of the qualification process
• definitions of key concepts used in the CA(SA) Competency Framework Suite of
Documents
A. PREFACE
• Identifies and describes the professional competencies (professional values and attitudes,
enabling acumens (PVAA's) and technical competencies) that a CA(SA) should
demonstrate at entry point to the profession.
B. CA(SA) ENTRY LEVEL COMPETENCY FRAMEWORK
• Provides endorsed providers of the academic programme with guidance for the content
development and assessment.
C. GUIDANCE ON THE CONTENT, DEVELOPMENT AND
ASSESSMENT OF COMPETENCIES IN THE ACADEMIC
PROGRAMME
• Sets out the
• fundamental principles on which the format of the training programme is based,
• fundamental principles on which the assessment of trainee accountants is based
D. GUIDANCE ON THE CONTENT, DEVELOPMENT AND
ASSESSMENT OF COMPETENCIES IN THE TRAINING
PROGRAMME
• Provides providers of the Academic Programme with Guidance on the purpose and nature
of the IAC
E. THE INITIAL ASSESSMENT OF COMPETENCE (IAC)
• Provides providers of the Professional Programme with guidance for the development and
assessment of competencies
F. THE PROFESSIONAL PROGRAMME AND THE ASSESSMENT
OF PROFESIONAL COMPETENCE (APC)
Appendix 1: Detailed competencies setting out the learning outcomes for the Professional Values Attitudes and Acumens
(PVAAs) and the Technical competencies at point of entry to the profession and across the various programmes
4

C. COMPONENTS OF THE COMPETENCY FRAMEWORK:
1. The competency framework is made up of the following components which in implementation are all
integrated:
Ethically responsible leaders
fulfilling their social mandate
by using integrated thinking to
create sustainable value
Icon Elements of the professional
competencies
Professional values and attitudes
Enabling competencies (defined as
acumens)
Technical competencies in the value
creation process
The aforementioned competencies are depicted in Figure 1 below:
5

2. CAs need to integrate all relevant competencies (professional values and attitudes, enabling
competencies (acumens) and technical competencies) to provide quality deliverables (inputs, services,
products and experiences) on a wide range of inputs, activities and outputs that lead to outcomes in an
organisation’s value creation process. This requires integrated thinking (also presented as an enabling
competency below) to achieve viable solutions while considering all alternatives, by obtaining a broader
understanding of an issue, creating a design or formulating a plan, etc.
There are three competency types4, namely:
(i) Professional Values and Attitudes;
(ii) Enabling competencies (acumens); and
(iii) Technical competencies in the value creation process.
3. The competency types cannot be developed or assessed in isolation and indeed it is where these
competency types overlap that thinking in an integrated manner is achieved.
4 The term PVAA’s is used to describe the professional values and attitudes as well as the acumens (enabling competencies)

D. DEFINING CAs AT ENTRY POINT TO THE PROFESSION AND BEYOND
1. Defining CAs(SA)
For the purposes of this framework, CAs(SA) are those professionals who are:
Responsible leaders who behave ethically and create sustainable value for a wide range
of stakeholders within an organisation.
Responsible leaders: These leaders need to display respect, courage and consideration for the
future (creation of sustainable value for the individual, the organisation and for humanity on a
global basis) by developing key relationships and by demonstrating a clear regard for justice
(recognise difference between what is right and wrong). A CA(SA) is a responsible leader with a
specific background in professional accountancy. This implies that a CA(SA) should always
display professional values and attitudes, have the full range of technical competencies of a
professional accountant and also those enabling competencies to demonstrate responsible
leadership qualities in a specific domain.
Behave ethically: The CA profession is committed to maintaining public confidence through an
overriding commitment to behave ethically in all professional tasks and interactions with others.
All CAs are required at all times to uphold ethical principles and to conduct themselves
professionally, in a manner that exemplifies and enhances the reputation of the CA profession.
Create sustainable value: CAs create value when they provide quality deliverables
(contributions, services, products and experiences) on a wide range of inputs, activities and
outputs that lead to outcomes in an organisation’s value creation process. This value creation
needs to be sustainable, thus sustaining the organisation and the context in which it exists. By
enhancing its positive impact on the economy, society and the environment and by eradicating or
ameliorating its negative impact on them, the organisation creates value for society and CAs have
a marked effect on or ability to influence the organisation’s value creation process.
As responsible leaders who behave ethically and create sustainable value for a wide
range of stakeholders within an organisation, CAs use:
Integrated thinking to interpret, analyse and evaluate financial and non-financial information.
This enables them to influence others, and together, make impactful decisions thereby
contributing meaningfully to the economy and to society.
Integrated thinking: The core of creating sustainable value is integrated thinking. It requires
synthesis and sense-making of ideas and information to develop a more complete understanding
of issues and/ or the implications of alternatives. At an individual level CAs use integrated thinking
for the interpretation, analysis and evaluation of financial and non-financial information to achieve
viable solutions whilst considering all alternatives, obtaining a broader understanding of an issue,
creating a design or formulating a plan etc. Such integrated thinking is done during active
consideration of relationships between various operating and functional units of an organisation
and the capitals that are affected or used. Integrated thinking requires CAs to always display
professional values and attitudes whilst thinking about value creation in an integrated manner.
This entails integrating enabling competencies with technical competencies.
Interpret, analyse and evaluate financial and non-financial information: CAs need to have the
full range of professional competencies for the interpretation, analysis and evaluation of financial
and non-financial information. In addition to preparing historical financials, budgets and business

documents based on past transactions in accordance with rules and standards, CAs need to
interpret, analyse and evaluate information on where value (tangible and intangible) is created and
destroyed based on real time information and forward-looking predictions, to gain insights that
could affect business models. This process includes understanding and modelling of non-
financial drivers of business performance.
To make impactful decisions whilst influencing others: CAs need to have a marked effect or
influence on an organisation’s value creation process. This requires that they establish, maintain
and develop internal and external relationships to participate in and inform an organisation’s value
creation process. Well-developed enabling competencies, complemented by sound technical
competencies, enable CAs, whilst displaying professional values and attitudes, to make impactful
decisions whilst influencing others.
Contribute meaningfully to the economy and society: The CA profession strives to make a
meaningful contribution to the economy and society by serving and protecting public interest from
a sustainable development perspective. Behavioural standards set out in the Code of Professional
Conduct recognise the CA profession’s public interest responsibility. This is supplemented by
professional standards and guidance that help to ensure CAs deliver quality work on which
relevant stakeholders can rely. A CA discharges his/her public interest responsibility by not only
complying with, or being seen to be complying with the letter of the Code of Professional Conduct,
but by their ability to apply the spirit of professionalism grounded in the fundamental ethical
principles of integrity, objectivity, professional competence and due care, and confidentiality, as
well as professional behaviour.
2. CAs at entry point to the profession
The definition of a CA at entry point to the profession is aligned to SAICA’s strategic objective,
namely to “develop responsible leaders” who are able to develop, influence and lead others,
irrespective of their role or job title.
This statement requires further expansion in order to be clear in defining the foundational
competencies expected of CAs at entry level to the profession. At entry point to the profession
CAs:
Have the potential to become responsible leaders who behave ethically and create
sustainable value for a wide range of stakeholders within an organisation.
They use integrated thinking to interpret, analyse and evaluate financial and non-
financial information. This enables them to influence others and support impactful
decision-making, thereby contributing meaningfully to the economy and to society.
Responsible leadership qualities at entry point to the profession: Leadership ability is unlikely
to result only from pre-qualification education, training and professional programmes. Professional
competencies, as explained in this competency framework should, however, equip an entry-level
CA to acquire leadership ability with post-qualification experience and participation in lifelong
learning. Thus, the competency framework focuses on professional competencies serving as a
foundation for the further development of responsible leadership abilities after entry to the
profession. Responsible leadership applies not to one’s level of seniority or title within an
organisation, but rather to the ability to make a difference to those around you. (#difference
makers)

Behave ethically at entry to the profession: Recently qualified CAs should uphold ethical
principles and conduct themselves professionally. Such conduct is required at all times and in a
manner that exemplifies and enhances the reputation of the CA profession.
Create sustainable value at entry point to the profession: At entry point to the profession CAs
have an effect on or an ability to influence an organisation’s value creation process when they
provide quality deliverables (contributions, services, products and experiences) on a wide range
of inputs, activities and outputs that lead to outcomes in the value creation process.
Integrated thinking at entry point to the profession: At entry point to the profession CAs have
to display integrated thinking when they participate in an organisation’s value creation process. It
requires, as explained above, synthesis and sense-making of ideas and information to develop a
more complete understanding of issues and/or the implications of alternatives. Recently qualified
CAs use integrated thinking to interpret, analyse and evaluate financial and non-financial
information to achieve viable solutions whilst considering all alternatives. Furthermore, in an
organisation’s value creation process, integrated thinking requires active consideration of
relationships between various operating and functional units of an organisation and the capitals
that are affected or used. Thus, recently qualified CAs need to think about value creation in an
integrated manner. It requires them to always display professional values and attitudes and
integrate enabling competencies with technical competencies.
Interpret, analyse and evaluate financial and non-financial information at entry point to the
profession: Actions and decisions of a recently qualified CA generally do not yet have a high-
level strategic impact. Thus a recently qualified CA’s technical competencies used for
interpretation, analysis and evaluation of financial and non-financial information still need to be
elevated from the purely technical to include directing and leading at a strategic level. Technical
competencies should be taught and assessed in education programmes with this objective in
mind. A recently qualified CA’s proficiency in enabling competencies influences ways of work,
ways of thinking and tools used to interpret, analyse and evaluate financial and non-financial
information.
Making impactful decisions whilst influencing others at entry point to the profession:
Significant influence through impactful decision-making is unlikely to be achieved by only making
use of pre-qualification education, training and professional programmes. Professional
competencies, as explained in this competency framework, should, however, equip a CA at entry
point to the profession to acquire the ability to exercise significant influence through impactful
decision-making with accumulation of post-qualification experience and the pursuit of lifelong
learning. Thus, the competency framework focuses on professional competencies serving as a
foundation for the further development of this ability after entry to the profession.
Contribute meaningfully to society: CAs at entry point to the profession make a meaningful
contribution to society by serving and protecting public interest from a sustainable development
perspective. This requires that they adhere to the Code of Professional Conduct and deliver
quality work in terms of the profession’s standards and guidance. A broad spectrum of
stakeholders relies on the work of newly qualified CAs. Thus, they must not only comply with, and
be seen to comply with the letter of the Code of Professional Conduct, but also the spirit of
professionalism grounded in the fundamental ethical principles of integrity, objectivity,
professional competence, due care and confidentiality, as well as demonstrating professional
behaviour.

3. CAs beyond entering the profession
CAs are lifelong learners who undertake relevant CPD activities to achieve competence for post-
qualification roles. These include, amongst others, responsible leadership and value creation in
diverse environments, which are deemed complex and/or ambiguous.
Lifelong learning: The development and acquisition of competencies after entry to the profession
(post qualification) are not limited to demonstrating abilities in relation to responsible leadership or
making impactful decisions whilst influencing others, but are likely to occur in many spheres of
competence, depending on the specific roles and responsibilities to which a CA is exposed.
Professional competence needs to be maintained (by remaining abreast of changes in existing
technical and enabling competencies) and developed (to incorporate new technical or enabling
competencies or improve proficiency levels linking to technical and enabling competencies) in
areas which relate to a particular field/role in which a CA is generally active after entering the
profession. In order for these competencies to be effectively and appropriately maintained and
developed, CAs need to embrace lifelong learning as a professional value and attitude.
From the above, it is therefore clear that the competency framework is contextualised within the
fundamental concepts of integrated reporting, sustainable development and value creation.
Furthermore, the fundamental principles of ethical behaviour, professional competence and
responsible leadership guide the qualities, characteristics or attributes of CAs and provide the
foundation for their professional conduct are set out in the preface.

E. COMPETENCY PROFICIENCY LEVELS
1. CAs at entry-level are expected to demonstrate competence at defined levels of proficiency.
Three levels of proficiency (ranging from 1 (the lowest) to 3 (the highest) in the context of the
academic programme are explained in this section and cover competency development from
foundational to expert levels. The first three levels of proficiency (foundational, intermediate
and advanced) are used in the competency framework. The expert level is achieved post-
qualification.
2. A proficiency level is specified for each of the professional values and attitudes, enabling
competencies and technical competencies (i.e. different measures are used). The
competency framework defines levels of proficiency at entry level to the profession. Guidance
documentation to academics and training officers provides further clarity on proficiency levels
for competencies to be developed during the academic, training and professional
programmes. This academic guidance document specifies proficiency levels for elements of
technical competencies which should be achieved during the academic programme, to reach
the overall level of proficiency per technical competency as specified in the competency
framework.
3. The proficiency levels to be applied to the academic programme are illustrated in the tables
below:
PROFESSIONAL VALUES AND ATTITUDES
1
Foundational level
of competence
2
Intermediate level of
competence
3
Advanced level of
competence
Proficiency levels are distinguished with reference to: (i) frequency and (ii) context,
Display professional values and attitudes:
(i) Frequency Occasionally Always under specific
applicable
circumstances
Always under all
applicable circumstances
(ii) Context In a simple context
with straightforward
situations and/or
circumstances
In an easily
understood context
with complexity limited
to specific situations
and/or circumstances
In a difficult context with
complex situations
and/or circumstances
ENABLING COMPETENCIES
(ACUMENS)1- Foundational
level of
competence
2- Intermediate level
of competence
3-Advanced level
of competenceProficiency levels are distinguished with reference to: (i) type of task, (ii) level of task
understanding, (iii) knowledge and skills needed for task performance, (iv) dependencies and (v)
level of guidance. Using enabling competencies during task performance:
i. type of task Follows pre-
determined steps to
perform the task
Initiating tasks and
perform tasks on a
preliminary
/preparatory basis
Initiating tasks and
complete all steps in tasks
ii. level of task
understanding
Displaying a basic
level of task
understanding (key
ideas and
principles)
Displaying an
intermediate level of task
understanding (detailed
knowledge including
some analysis/
evaluation)
Displaying an advanced
level of task
understanding (clear
problem identification,
thorough analysis
/evaluation and useful
recommendations are
made)

iii. knowledge
and skills
needed for
task
performance
Using limited
knowledge and
skills needed to
perform the task
Using multiple
knowledge sources and
skills in certain (or some)
areas
AND
Using limited knowledge
sources and skills in
other areas to perform
the task
Integrating multiple
knowledge sources and
skills in all areas, to
perform a task
iv.dependencies
(applicable to
training
programme
only)
i. Working under
supervision and
ii. Carrying out
tasks with a low
level of risk and
complexity using
established
processes
i. Working as part of a
team and
ii. Carrying out some
tasks independently,
being responsible for
the quality of own
work
i. Managing own work
and being responsible
for the quality and
quantity of the work
done and
ii. May be responsible for
leading a team and
managing certain
functions
v. level of
guidance
(applicable to
training
programme
only)
Requiring frequent
guidance Requiring limited guidance Requiring little or no
guidance
TECHNICAL COMPETENCIES
1
Foundational level
of competence
2
Intermediate level of
competence
3
Advanced level of
competence
Proficiency levels are distinguished with reference to: (i) level of knowledge of the subject
matter, (ii) level of application and (iii) problem solving to distinguish proficiency levels.
Display technical competence by:
(i) Knowledge
dimension
Identify and describe
the key ideas /
principles /
fundamental concepts
of the subject matter
pertaining to routine
and non-routine
situations [Technical
expertise or detailed
knowledge not
required]
Demonstrate a detailed and comprehensive
understanding5 of the subject matter pertaining to
routine situations.
(ii) Application
dimension
Identify and explain
the significance and
relevance of the
subject matter and
• Apply the knowledge
to non-complex
routine situations.
• Apply the knowledge to
complex routine
situations.
5 ‘Detailed and comprehensive understanding’ covers breadth and depth of the subject matter. The distinction between levels 2 and
3 is reflected in the application and problem-solving dimensions.

TECHNICAL COMPETENCIES
1
Foundational level
of competence
2
Intermediate level of
competence
3
Advanced level of
competence
recognise the linkages
with other subject
matter(s).
• Identify and utilise the
relevant knowledge
within and across
competency area(s)
in a limited manner.
• Evaluate and
synthesise the
knowledge within and
across competency
areas (Integrative
thinking is required).
(iii) Problem
solving
dimension
Recognise issues
when encountered
and seek further
depth / guidance.
Prepare or analyse
solutions for specified
problems and applying
limited judgement.
Evaluate or formulate
solutions for specified
and implicit problems –
applying a high degree of
rigour, and/or exercise
sound judgement in
making
recommendations.
4. The proficiency levels build on each other. Intermediate level of competence means
demonstrating proficiency at level 2, in addition to demonstrating proficiency at level 1.
Advance level of competence means demonstrating proficiency at level 3, in addition to
demonstrating proficiency at levels 1 and 2.
5. Definitions:
Routine
situations
Situations (situations, events, or transactions) that are:
(a) Prevalent, determined with reference to the frequency with which
they occur in practice and how relevant they are in practice (occur
frequently and are very relevant),
(b) Of a size or degree of complexity likely to be encountered by a
typical/generalist CA(SA) at the point of qualification, and
(c) That require a typical/generalist CA(SA) at the point of qualification to
apply knowledge and judgement to make a recommendation.
Non-routine
situations
Situations (situations, events or transactions) that are:
(a) Prevalent, determined with reference to how infrequently they occur
in practice and how relevant they are in practice (occur infrequently),
(b) Of a size or degree of complexity unlikely to be encountered by a
typical/generalist CA(SA) at the point of qualification, but
(c) Of a size or degree of complexity that requires judgement at a
different level of expertise or specialist knowledge. [In these
situations, the typical/generalist entry level CA(SA) is expected to
demonstrate a ‘level 1 foundational level of competence’]

6. Complexity is influenced by the following factors:
1
Foundational level of
competence
2
Intermediate level of
competence
3
Advanced level of
competence
Information
• Structured
• Limited amount of
information
• Semi-structured
• Larger amount of
information
• Unstructured
• Large amount of
information
Technique/ What to do with information
• Define, list, explain or
contrast techniques or
methods
• Recall, translate or interpret
information
• Make basic predictions
based on information
• Relevant information
provided
• Choose the appropriate
technique and apply to a
problem
• Extract and/or summarise
key information
• Organise information by
deconstruction
• Mostly relevant information
provided
• Identify various techniques
and judge the
appropriateness of each to
solve a problem
• Devise or create a method
or technique to solve a
problem
• Organise information from
various sources and
evaluate information for
accuracy
• Distinguish between
relevant and irrelevant
information
Typical requirements/ verbs
• Define and recall
• Translations, interpretation
and extrapolation
• Applying theories or
methods
• Calculations, analysis,
classifications and
calculations where one or
more method is involved
• Deconstruct a problem and
understand how the parts fit
together
• Discussions, arguments or
reasoning to perform an
analysis or make decision
• Applying multiple
techniques, adjustments,
projections or recalculations
to create a plan, solution or
structure
• Formulate a solution, make
recommendations and
come to a conclusion
• Provide advice

Verbs
Classify, Comprehend,
Convert, Define,
Demonstrate, Demonstrate
appreciation, Demonstrate
awareness, Demonstrate
understanding, Describe,
Discuss, Distinguish,
Estimate, Explain, Express,
Extend, Generalise, Give
examples, Identify, Illustrate,
Infer, Interpret, List,
Memorise, Name, Order,
Outline, Paraphrase, Predict,
Recall, Recognise, Restate,
Rewrite, Select, State,
Summarise, Translate,
Understand, Write
Analyse, Apply, Arrange,
Assess, Assign, Break down,
Calculate, Categorise,
Change, Choose, Compare,
Complete, Construct,
Contrast, Compute,
Construct, Criticise,
Demonstrate, Describe with
evaluation, Differentiate,
Discover, Discuss,
Distinguish, Employ,
Estimate, Examine,
Experiment, Identify, Infer,
Interpret, Investigate,
Manipulate, Model, Modify,
Operate, Order, Perform,
Prepare, Prioritise, Produce,
Question, Reconcile, Relate,
Reorganise, Report, Review,
Revise, Schedule, Select,
Separate, Set up, Show,
Solve, Summarise, Tell,
Tabulate, Use, Utilise, Write
Advise, Appraise, Argue,
Arrange, Assemble, Assess,
Choose, Collect, Combine,
Compare (complex),
Compose, Conclude,
Construct, Contrast
(complex), Create, Criticise,
Defend, Design, Develop,
Devise, Discriminate,
Estimate, Evaluate, Explain,
Formulate, Generate,
Integrate, Interpret, Invent,
Judge, Justify, Manage,
Organise, Plan, Predict,
Propose, Rate, Rearrange,
Recommend, Reconstruct,
Relate, Reorganise, Resolve,
Revise, Select, Set up, Solve,
Summarise, Support,
Synthesise, Tell, Value, Write
7. Learning and development as a CA(SA) continues post qualification, and it is therefore
reasonable to expect that in some roles CAs(SA) would reach a specialist or mastery level
on some of the competencies and learning outcomes. This means that a proficiency level
beyond a level 3 may be achieved or expected post entering the profession.
8. This further proficiency level can be described as:
a) Demonstrating specialist knowledge (depth of knowledge in a specific area),
b) Applying this specialist knowledge critically and creatively in complex, integrated and
ambiguous situations which may involve multiple interpretations, and
c) Generating solutions for defined outputs for unspecified problems and applying a high
degree of rigour while exercising sound professional judgement.
9. Once qualified, there is a need for a CA(SA) to apply the principle in the Code of
Professional Conduct that requires the professional to evaluate and ensure they have the
necessary professional competence and to exercise due care in preforming their specific
role. The requirement to continue to learn and develop post qualification is also clearly
articulated in the SAICA CPD policy which seeks to measure ongoing lifelong learning and
development.

F OUTCOME OF THE COMPETENCY FRAMEWORK
In achieving professional competence, CAs are expected to display professional values and
attitudes, and for each area (inputs, business processes, outputs leading to outcomes) be able
to integrate relevant acumens and technical competencies. In addition, such integration should
be done within, between and across areas.
This section is accompanied by Appendix 1: Professional Competency outcomes
(PVAA’s) and Technical Competency learning outcomes detailed across the various
programmes. The appendix documents the competency framework learning outcomes at
entry to the CA profession and across the various programmes, namely the Academic
programme, the training programme and the professional programme
The outcome of effective integration of professional competencies manifests as CAs(SA),
at point of entry to the profession, having the potential to be responsible leaders who
behave ethically and are able to create sustainable value for a wide range of
stakeholders within an organisational context. With their ability to display integrated
thinking, CAs are then able to interpret, analyse and evaluate financial and non-
financial information, thus influencing others, and together making impactful
decisions, and thereby contributing meaningfully to the economy and to society.
1. PROFESSIONAL VALUES AND ATTITUDES
These define professional behaviour and identify professional accountants as CAs, and as
members of the CA profession. CAs draw on their personal and professional values and their
ability to act with honesty, integrity, accountability and trustworthiness to demonstrate moral
and ethical behaviour in the business context and to protect the public interest. By doing more
than adhering to the rules of professional conduct, CAs are required at all times to uphold
ethical principles and conduct themselves professionally in a manner that exemplifies and
enhances the reputation of the CA profession. As lifelong learners, CAs maintain and develop
their competence in order to adapt and work in an agile way to deal with complexities.
PROFESSIONAL VALUES AND ATTITUDES
Competency area pervasive in all other
competencies Competency short name
I Ethics, values and attitudes I1 Personal ethics
I2 Business ethics
I3 Professional ethics
II Citizenship, values and attitudes II1 Personal citizenship
II2 Professional citizenship
II3 Corporate citizenship

III Lifelong learning, values and
attitudes
III1 Self-development
III2 Adaptive mind set and agility
III3 Emotional Intelligence
Rossouw and Van Vuuren (2003) make a distinction between cognitive competence,
behavioural competence, and managerial competence with respect to ethics. In terms of the
professional values and attitudes (“PVA”), and specifically ethics and citizenship, the academic
programme provides the opportunity for the development of both cognitive competence (i.e.
technical competence (refer to the “minimum content” column in the table below, together with
the related proficiency levels) and behavioural competence (i.e. professional values and
attitudes’) (refer to the “learning outcomes” column in the table below). Note that, given the
context of the academic and training programmes, it is likely that managerial competence will
only be achieved post-qualification.
The table that follows details the competency area in the Professional Values and Attitudes,
an overall explanation of the area, the competency related to the area and the definition of the
competency.
Detailed information on professional values and attitudes is presented in a separate document:
Appendix 1. This Appendix documents the proficiency levels, outcomes and minimum content
of the PVAA’s. It is presented at “entry level” (the competency framework) and across the
various programmes, namely the Academic programme, the Training programme and the
Professional programme. It also includes the minimum content to be covered in the Academic,
Training and Professional Programme.

PROFESSIONAL VALUES AND ATTITUDES
Competency Area Explanation Sub-category Definition
I Ethics, values and
attitudes:
This competency area includes
personal, business and professional
ethics and describes the ethical
principles, values and attitudes an
individual must apply, also when
interacting with others
I1 Personal ethics Personal ethics refers to a personal value system applied
by an individual to decision-making, conduct and
interaction between the self and others.
I2 Business ethics
Business ethics refers to the ethical principles and values
applied by the organisation to decision-making, conduct
and the relationship between the organisation, its
stakeholders and society (King IV).
I3 Professional
ethics
Professional ethics refers to the fundamental ethical
principles and values applied by a professional CA to
decision-making, conduct and the relationship between
the professional, its stakeholders and society
II Citizenship, values
and
“Citizenship” is most often used to
indicate nationality and explain the
rights and responsibilities attached to
“membership” of a nation state.
Although it is the individual/the
person who is a citizen, a citizen
cannot exist without belonging to a
state.
II1 Personal
citizenship
Personal citizenship is used to indicate that there are
rights/responsibilities to being a member of multiple
communities (see details of the communities that
individuals belong to at II1 Personal citizenship and II2
relates to membership of the accountancy profession).
II2 Corporate
citizenship
Corporate citizenship relates to the corporation’s
responsibilities/rights in society which has long been part
of the field of business ethics (see I2 Business ethics).
Being a member of a corporation, a CA should assist the
corporation to become and be seen as a good corporate
citizen.

Competency Area Explanation Sub-category Definition
III Lifelong learning,
values and attitudes
Life-long learning refers to the
process of self-initiated education
and ongoing learning aimed at self-
development and acquiring an
adaptive and agile mind set
III1 Self-development Self-development refers to the planning and management
of personal development and an appreciation of how
personal strengths and weaknesses may impact work,
learning and goal attainment.
III2 Adaptive mind
set and agility Adaptive mind set and agility refers to taking initiative to
improve performance and well-being by reviewing and
reflecting on work performance.
III3 Emotional
Intelligence
Establish and sustain trusting relationships based on self-
awareness, sensitivity to the situation, culture and people
involved.

2. ENABLING COMPETENCIES
These are essential skills that influence the ways that CAs(SA) work, ways that they think,
ways they are living in the world, and the tools that they use in the workplace. Enabling
competencies are pervasive to a CA’s work and behaviour, are transversal and are to be used
effectively across different environments, functions and roles. Enabling competencies allow a
CA to effectively demonstrate their professional competence, by displaying decision-making,
business, digital and relational acumens. The foundation for the further development of
enabling competencies is set during the Academic Programme, while these are further
developed with real-life and practical experience during the Training Programme and the
Professional Programme, and which form the foundation for a strong life-long learning ethic.
Acumen is defined as “the ability to judge well; keen discernment, insight” (Collins English
Dictionary, 2008). These acumens are necessary qualities of a CA(SA), enabling the
performance of their work in the value creation process. They are skills which should be
demonstrated and applied by a CA in conjunction with their specific technical knowledge.
These acumens may in some cases not contain any suggested or minimum content as
numerous opportunities to develop and demonstrate these acumens exist. The Academic
Programme can assist in this development by providing different opportunities to develop or
demonstrate these acumens (such as teaching various theories, using videos as educational
material and requiring students to do projects). Each prospective CA should take ownership
of developing these acumens using both the formal academic programme and other
developmental opportunities.
ACUMENS Competency short name
W Digital acumen W1 Computational thinking
W2 Data knowledge and strategy
W3 Data analytics
W4 Automation
W5 New developments and protocols (e.g. artificial
intelligence (AI), blockchain, Internet of Things etc.)
W6 Cyber security
W7 User competencies
X
Relational acumen
X1 Communication skills
X2 Leadership skills
X3 People skills
X4 Relationship-building skills
X5 Teamwork
X6 Self-management
X7 Managing others
Y Decision-making
acumen
Y1 Analytical/critical thinking
Y2 Integrative thinking
Y3 Problem solving
Y4 Judgement and decision-making
Y5 Professional scepticism
Z Business acumen
Z1 Business internal environment
Z2 Business external environment
Z3 Innovation, creativity and curiosity

2.1 What do we mean by integrated thinking?
Integrated thinking is the active consideration by an organisation of the relationships between
its various operating and functional units and the capitals that the organisation uses or effects
to create value over the short, medium and long term. Organisations that practice integrated
thinking make a deliberate and coordinated effort to connect an organisation’s strategy,
governance, performance and prospects as part of their sustainability journey.
Sustainability is the integration of environmental, health, social, equity and economic vitality in
order to create thriving, healthy, diverse and resilient communities for the present generation
and generations to come. The practice of sustainability recognises how these issues are
interconnected and requires a systems approach and an acknowledgement of complexity.
X, Y and Z are the enabling competencies needed to engage in Integrated Thinking.
2.2 Competency areas and definitions of enabling competencies
The table that follows details the competency area in the Professional Values and Attitudes,
an overall explanation of the area, the competency related to the area and the definition of the
competency.
Detailed information on professional values and attitudes is presented in a separate document:
Appendix 1. This Appendix documents the proficiency levels, outcomes and minimum content
of the PVAA’s. It is presented at the At Entry Level (the competency framework) and across
the various programmes, namely the Academic programme, the training programme and the
professional programme. It also includes the minimum content to be covered in the Academic,
Training and Professional Programme.

ACUMEN EXPLANATION SUB-CATEGORY DEFINITION
W Digital acumen:
This competency area refers to
digital topics that influence ways of
work and business decisions and
includes computational thinking, data
knowledge and strategy, data
analytics, new developments and
protocols, cyber security and user
competencies
W1 Computational
thinking
Computational thinking is a set of problem-solving methods
that involve expressing problems and their solutions in ways
that a computer could also execute.
W2 Data knowledge
and strategy
Understanding the types of financial and non-financial
information available within an entity, identifying possible
relationships between data sets, requesting the required
data (including normalisation (clean-up) thereof),
understanding the security and privacy risks associated with
the use, storage and transfer of data, and understanding the
importance of the implementation of sufficient data
protection policies and controls. Advanced data
management should be performed by expert data scientists
and/or IT experts
W3 Data analytics
Performing basic data modelling or where necessary
requesting advanced data modelling by experts, and then
interpreting the results, concluding and reporting/
presenting/ communicating as applicable. The W2
competency comprises both a technical computer skill and
the ability to apply the underlying technical competency.
W4 Automation Automation is the technology by which a process or
procedure is performed with minimal human assistance
W5
New
developments
and protocols
Includes new developments such as artificial intelligence
(AI), blockchain, the Internet of Things etc.
W6 Cyber security Cyber security is the practice of defending computers and
servers, mobile devices, electronic systems, networks and
data from malicious attacks
W7 User
Competencies
Use technology ethically as an enabler to optimise decision
making and to promote business efficiencies and controls.
ENABLING COMPETENCIES/ACUMENS

ACUMEN EXPLANATION SUB-CATEGORY DEFINITION
X Relational
acumen
Relational acumen is defined as the
“art of developing relationships”
(Churchley, Neufeld, Purvey, 2013).
It is the ability to develop, maintain
and adapt relationships and
stakeholder networks to ensure
facilitation of required action; the
delivery of relevant feedback and the
development of relational trust
X1 Communication
skills
Effectively convey information and ideas to individuals and
groups in a variety of situations in a focused way using
verbal and non-verbal techniques and skills.
X2 Leadership skills Work with others and manage and lead teams.
X3 People skills
People skills are patterns of behaviour and behavioural
interactions. Among people, it is an umbrella term for skills
under three related set of abilities: personal effectiveness,
interaction skills, and intercession skills
X4 Relationship-
building skills Build authentic relationships and effective collaboration
across a wide range of teams and stakeholders
X5 Teamwork
Interrelated abilities that let you work effectively in an
organised group. Teamwork happens when people
cooperate and use their individual skills to achieve common
goals.
X6 Self-management
Plan and manage personal development and appreciate
how personal strengths and weaknesses may impact work,
learning and goal attainment.
X7 Managing others Work with others and manage and lead teams.
Y Decision-making
acumen
This competency area refers to
cognitive processes to decide on
actions or between alternatives and
includes analytical / critical thinking,
integrated thinking, problem-solving,
judgement and decision-making and
professional scepticism
Y1 Analytical/critical
thinking
Research, investigate, critically analyse, reflect and apply
professional judgement to the evaluation of data and
information from a variety of sources and perspectives.
Y2 Integrated
thinking
Integrative thinking is a decision-making approach for
complex problems based on finding new, creative solutions
rather than merely choosing the best solution from a list of
alternatives.
Y3 Problem solving
Collate and compare information from multiple sources to
correctly define a problem, assess alternative solutions
against decision criteria and make the optimal decision.
Y4 Judgement and
decision-making The ability to make considered and effective decisions,
come to sensible conclusions, perceive and distinguish

ACUMEN EXPLANATION SUB-CATEGORY DEFINITION
relationships, understand situations, and form objective
opinions.
Y5 Professional
scepticism
Having a questioning mind. Being alert to anything that may
indicate misstatement due to error or fraud. Critically
assessing evidence.
Z Business
acumen:
The ability to make quick correct
and/or focused strategic decisions
and good judgements in a business
or business division
Z1 Business internal
environment
Using your understanding of the entity’s internal operations,
assist in the process of making strategic decisions and good
judgements in a business or business division
Z2 Business external
environment
Using your understanding of the entity’s’ external
environment, assist in the process of making strategic
decisions and good judgements in a business or business
division
Z3 Innovation and
creativity
Developing new concepts, innovative ways or new ideas
promoting a business success or wide-spread use, using a
questioning or inquisitive mind-set.

3. TECHNICAL COMPETENCIES IN THE VALUE CREATION PROCESS
CAs(SA) have always been renowned for their technical competence and the
development of these competencies is a key deliverable of the academic programme
which is endorsed by SAICA. Technical competencies reflect the knowledge of CAs as
professional accountants which enables them to deliver quality work in public practice,
industry, the public sector, academia and more.
Technical competence is defined as the ability to apply technical competencies (the
content that makes up the subject of accountancy, as well as other business disciplines
that together constitute the essential body of knowledge for CAs) and to perform a role
to a defined standard. Technical competencies in the value creation process are
categorized into six areas (1 Strategy and Governance, 2 Stewardship of Capitals, 3
Decision-making, 4 Reporting, 5 Compliance and 6 Assurance and Related Services)
and these are displayed in Figure 3.
This competency framework uses an organisation’s value creation process to
articulate the technical competencies. Such a process requires that the organisation
adopt a business model for transforming inputs through business activities into outputs
that lead to outcomes and aims that fulfil its strategic purpose and create sustainable
value over the short, medium and long term (King IV, 2016). The organisation draws
on various capitals (financial, manufactured, intellectual, human, social and
relationship, and natural) as inputs and, through its business activities, these are
converted to outputs which lead to outcomes (IIRC, 2013).
Inputs: These relate to the capitals on which the organisation depends or that
differentiate it and are seen to be material to understanding the robustness and
resilience of the organisation’s business model (IIRC, 2013). The organisation’s
strategy, providing a sense of identity and general direction, drives its business model.
The CA(SA) as a professional accountant provides insights and impactful decisions
that influence the organisation’s short-, medium- and long-term strategic objectives,
and which culminate in the organisation’s business model. Those charged with
governance have ultimate responsibility for how the organisation’s strategy,
governance and performance lead to value creation over time (IIRC, 2013). The
organisation’s strategy is achieved through implementing resource allocation plans
(IIRC, 2013). For purpose of this framework, technical competencies on INPUTS
comprise of STRATEGY AND GOVERNANCE matters to create sustainable value,

including the organisation’s governance model, its business strategy, its business
model and finance strategy, and also by taking into account tax strategy and tax risk
management.
Business activities: Capitals (stocks of value) on which the organisation depends to
be successful are increased, decreased or transformed through its business activities
(IIRC, 2013). CAs(SA), as professional accountants with the ability to interpret,
analyse and evaluate financial and non-financial information, ideally position
themselves to influence decision-making affecting the organisation’s business
activities, for example having an impact on how the organisation differentiates itself in
the marketplace, generates income, approaches the need to innovate and to adapts
to change. For purposes of this framework, technical competencies on BUSINESS
ACTIVITIES comprise of STEWARDSHIP OF CAPITALS (reporting fundamentals,
business systems and processes, and risk management and control) and DECISION-
MAKING to increase, decrease or transform capitals. The latter includes performance
measurement for decision-making by management and other internal users of financial
information, financing decisions, investment decisions, the use of derivatives, business
valuation, performance management systems, decisions on financially troubled
businesses as well as related tax law implications.
Outputs leading to outcomes: Stakeholders are informed about the organisation’s
outputs (e.g., financial position and performance, products and services) leading to
outcomes (e.g., tax payments, net increase/decrease in the capitals) (IIRC, 2013).
Various communications (for example integrated reports or other extended external
reports, financial statements and tax returns) are used for this purpose. With his/her
knowledge of financial and non-financial reporting standards, auditing standards, laws
and regulations, the CA(SA) as a professional accountant is a key role player in
reporting, assurance and compliance processes. For purpose of this framework,
technical competencies on OUTPUTS leading to OUTCOMES comprises
REPORTING on value creation, which includes performance measurement for
external users of general-purpose financial statements for non-specialised profit-
orientated entities, public sector entities and other not-for-profit entities. Technical
competencies on COMPLIANCE address tax governance and laws and regulations.
For ASSURANCE AND RELATED SERVICES, the technical competencies comprise
concepts and principles of assurance engagements, audits of historical financial
statements for non-specialised profit orientated entities, public sector entities, other
not-for-profit entities, other assurance services and other related services.
INPUTS
AREA 1 SUB-CATEGORY
A Strategy and
governance to
create
sustainable
value
A1 Governance model
A2 Business strategy
A3 Aligning the business model with the business strategy
A4 Finance strategy
A5 Tax strategy
BUSINESS ACTIVITIES
AREA 2 SUB-CATEGORY
B Stewardship of
capitals:
business
processes and
risk management
B1 Reporting fundamentals
B2 Business systems and processes
B3 Risk management and control

AREA 3 SUB-CATEGORY
C Decision-making
to increase,
decrease or
transform
capitals
C1 Performance measurement for decision-making by
management and other internal users of financial
information
C2 Financing decisions
C3 Investment decisions
C4 Use of derivatives
C5 Business valuation
C6 Performance management systems
C7 Financially troubled businesses
C8 Tax law implications
OUTPUTS LEADING TO OUTCOMES
AREA 4 SUB-CATEGORY
D Reporting on
value creation
D1 Performance measurement for users of extended external
reports
AREA 5 SUB-CATEGORY
E Compliance E1 Tax governance
E2 Laws and regulations
AREA 6 SUB-CATEGORY
F Assurance and
related services
F1 Concepts and principles of assurance engagements
F2 Audits of historical financial statements of a non-specialised
profit orientated entity
F3 Audits of historical financial statements of a public sector
entities
F4 Other assurance services
F5 Other related services
3.1 Competency areas and definitions of enabling competencies
The table that follows details the technical competencies in the value creation process (Inputs,
activities and outputs), competency areas, the competency related to the area and the
definition of the competency.
Detailed information on the enabling competencies is presented Appendix 2. The workbook
appendix documents the proficiency levels, outcomes and minimum content of the technical
competencies. It is presented at the At Entry Level (the competency framework) and across
the various programmes, namely the Academic programme, the training programme and the
professional programme. It also includes the minimum content to be covered in the Academic,
Training and Professional Programme.

AREA 1- Strategy and governance to create sustainable
value SUB-CATEGORY Sub-Category Definition
A
Strategy and
governance to
create
sustainable
value
Strategy and Governance
involves the authoritative and
accountable framework for an
organisation's actions and
decisions, encompassing the
fundamental governance model,
the development and
implementation of a business
strategy to achieve goals, and the
alignment of the business model
with that strategy. This includes
the formulation of specific
financial and tax strategies, while
considering internal and external
influences, to ensure the
organisation's goals are met and
value is created.
A1 Governance
model
The authority and accountability of role players
in a governance process and includes the
governance model of a business, including the
fundamentals of governance (including
governance theories and approaches to
achieving effective governance), governance
structures and practices as well as internal
auditing as a governance mechanism.
A2 Business strategy
The actions and decisions of an organisation to
achieve its goals and includes the strategy
development process, the external and internal
influences on the organisation’s business
strategy, the IT and data strategy as well as the
implementation of the developed business and
other strategies
A3
Aligning the
business model
with the business
strategy
This competency area refers to how an
organisation’s strategy is embedded in a plan
aimed at successful operation and includes the
building blocks of the business model, disruptive
business models, the change management
process and building relations and growth
strategies.
INPUTS

AREA 1- Strategy and governance to create sustainable
value SUB-CATEGORY Sub-Category Definition
A4 Finance strategy
This competency area refers to actions and
decisions of an organisation to achieve its
finance goals and includes the organisation’s
finance plan (including the finance strategy),
factors influencing the finance strategy and the
appraisal of the finance strategy
A5 Tax strategy
This competency area refers to actions and
decisions of an organisation to achieve its tax
goals and includes the organisation’s tax
strategy, tax risk management and tax morality.
INPUTS

Business Activities
AREA 2_ Business Activities Sub-Category Definition
B
Stewardship of capitals:
business processes and risk
management
Stewardship of capitals is the
responsible and accountable
management of an
organisation's resources. This
is achieved through effective
business processes and a
robust risk management
system that ensures reliable
operations, compliance with
regulations, and the creation of
value.
B1 Reporting
fundamentals
This competency area forms a base or core for
knowledge on reporting knowledge and includes the
fundamental reporting concepts and accounting
information systems.
B2 Business systems
and processes
This competency area refers to a collection of
workflow processes within a system and includes
the transactional business processes and digital
technologies used by a business to convert inputs
into outputs.
B3 Risk management
and control
This competency refers to actions and decisions to
ensure effective operations, reliable information and
compliance with rules and regulations. This area
includes the risk management systems and
processes, the control systems and processes, the
combined assurance model within the organisation
as well as the testing of controls for operational
effectiveness.
AREA 3: Decision-making to increase, decrease or transform
capitals SUB-CATEGORY Sub-Category Definition

C
Decision-making to increase,
decrease or transform
capitals
This area involves making
strategic financial and
operational decisions to
manage and optimise an
organization's resources
(capitals). It includes measuring
performance, making key
choices about financing and
investments, utilising
derivatives, and assessing
business value. The goal is to
ensure the organisation's
financial health, manage risks,
and implement strategies for
growth or recovery from
financial trouble, while also
considering the tax implications
of these decisions.
C1
Performance
measurement for
decision-making by
management and
other internal users
of financial
information
This competency refers to a set of activities and
outputs for management and other internal users to
reach the organization’s goals. This area includes
decision-making based on price setting and capacity
utilization information, decision-making based on
budgeting and expenditure forecasting, internal cost
allocation and transfer pricing options as well as
uncertainty, volatility or inaccuracy, and
consideration of qualitative factors in decision
making
C2 Financing decisions
This competency area refers to actions and activities
to raise capital and includes financing decisions
taken by the organisation relating to its cash
management, sources of funds, the distribution of
profits and the appraisal of capital structures.
C3 Investment
decisions
This competency area refers to the determination of
how much, when and where capital needs to be
spend or debit need to be acquired to reach the
goals of the organisation. It includes investment
decisions taken by the organisation relating to the
appraisal of its capital investment and allocation of
capital.
C4 Use of derivatives
This competency area refers contracts between
parties based on value of agreed-upon underlying
assets and includes aspects to the use of derivatives
and the financial risks associated with derivatives

C
Decision-making to increase,
decrease or transform
capitals (cont)
C5 Business valuation
This competency area refers to the process to
estimate the value of a business interest and
includes the valuation of a business, the valuation of
intangibles as well as mergers, acquisitions and
divestitures.
C6
Performance
management
systems
This competency area refers to activities to track
and monitor performance and includes
organisational performance based on key
performance indicators, performance evaluation and
reward structures including offering incentives
C7 Financially troubled
businesses
This competency area refers to an organisation that
struggles to pay its debts and includes the
assessment of under-performance and strategies to
overcome under-performance.
C8 Tax law implications
This competency area refers to the tax implications
relating to financing decisions, investment decisions,
financially troubled businesses and reward
structures.

AREA 5 Explanation Sub-Category Sub-category definitions
E Compliance
Compliance is the act of
adhering to applicable laws and
regulations, including the
interpretation and application of
specific tax legislation, as
required by governmental
agencies and legislation.
E1 Tax governance
This competency area refers to tax rules and
regulations and includes the tax landscape in South
Africa, the interpretation of tax legislation, the
application of tax legislation to calculate the tax
obligation and the application of tax legislation to
comply with administrative provisions.
E2 Laws and
regulations
This competency area refers to regulation created
by governmental agency which is often implemented
in a law and includes compliance with applicable
laws and regulations by an organisation.
AREA 6 Explanation Sub-Category Sub-category definitions
F Assurance and related
services
This area involves the
application of fundamental F1 Concepts and
principles of
This competency area refers to fundamental
assumptions and understandings of assurance
OUTPUTS LEADING TO OUTCOMES
AREA 4 SUB-CATEGORY Sub-Category Definition
D Reporting on value creation
This competency area refers to
analysing and reporting
information regarding the
performance of organisations
and includes financial reporting
in accordance with IFRS and
other reporting frameworks as
well as extended external
reports.
D1
Performance
measurement for
external users of
general purpose
financial statements
This competency area refers to analysing and
reporting information regarding the performance of
organisations and includes financial reporting in
accordance with IFRS and other reporting
frameworks as well as extended external reports.

AREA 6 Explanation Sub-Category Sub-category definitions
principles and concepts of
assurance engagements to
provide confidence in
information. It includes audits
of historical financial
statements for various types of
entities as well as a range of
other assurance and non-
assurance services, such as
compiling financial statements,
forensic audits, and internal
audit.
assurance
engagements
services and includes the concept of assurance, the
expectation gap, the regulatory environment of
assurance engagements, ethical principles of
assurance providers and the assurance
engagement risk considerations
F2
Audits of historical
financial statements
of a non-specialised
profit orientated
entity
This competency area refers to audits of profit-
orientated companies not operating in specialised
industries and includes the concepts and principles
of audits of historic financial information, performing
an audit of historic financial information, reliance on
other parties and communicating audit findings
relating to non-specialised profit orientated entities.
F3
Audits of historical
financial statements
of a public sector
entities
This competency area refers to audits of public
sector entities and includes the concepts and
principles of audits of historic financial information,
performing an audit of historic financial information,
reliance on other parties and communicating audit
findings relating to public sector entities.
F4
Audits of historical
financial statements
of other not-for-
profit entities
This competency area refers to assurance services
other than an audit and includes assurance
engagements on other non-financial information
including the combined assurance process.
F5 Other assurance
services
This competency area refers to non-assurance
related services and includes the compilation of
financial statements, agreed upon procedures
engagements, forensic audit, internal audit and due
diligence engagements.

APPENDIX 1: PVAA AND TECHNICAL COMPETENCIES AND DETAIL OUTCOMES
ACROSS THE VARIOUS PROGRAMMES
This separate excel workbook forms an appendix to the competency framework document.
It documents the competency framework learning outcomes and proficiency levels at entry to
the CA profession and across the various programmes, namely the Academic programme, the
training programme and the professional programme for each of the competency areas as
stipulated in this document.

APPENDIX 2: GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Acumen Acumen is defined as “the ability to judge well; keen discernment, insight”
(Collins dictionary)Agility The ability to reassess the needs of the situation being dealt with and to
respond and adapt quickly and easily
Attitude Attitude is the pervasive way a CA thinks and feels about being a
professional accountant, the profession, business and life
Artificial intelligence Artificial intelligence is the simulation of human intelligence through expert
computer systems to perform tasks/processes previously requiring human
intelligenceBig data Big data refers to extremely large computer-generated data sets, and
characterised by the volume, variety, velocity, veracity and value of data
being created/generated through new and powerful computational
resources to reveal patterns, trends, and associations not previously
discernibleBlockchain Blockchain is a type of distributed ledger, functioning as a decentralised
database, for maintaining a permanent and tamper-proof record of
transactional data. It is a system in which the records of transactions
made, for example, in bitcoin or other cryptocurrencies are maintained
across several computers belonging to a peer-to-peer network. Each of
the computers in the network maintains a copy of the ledger to prevent a
single point of failure, and all copies are updated and validated
simultaneously
Business An integrated set of activities and assets that is capable of being conducted
and managed for the purpose of providing goods or services to customers,
generating investment income (such as dividends or interest) or generating
other income from ordinary activities.Business model A business model is the conceptual structure supporting the viability of a
business, including its purpose, its goals and its ongoing plans for
achieving them. A business model reflects how an organisation fulfils its
purposeCognitive computing
systems
Cognitive computing systems use computerised models to simulate
human cognition processes by synthesizing data from various
information sources (and includes weighing context and conflicting
evidence), to find solutions in complex situationsCompetence-related terms
Competency area
(within each
competency type)
Each competency type has a number of different competency areas to
assist in grouping common competencies and learning outcomes
together. Competency areas are a class or group in which each
member has a characteristic common to all the rest; one of the
fundamental classes to which objects of knowledge can be assigned.
For example, Professional Values and Attitudes (competency type) has
three competency areas being:
I. Ethics, values and attitudes
II. Citizenship, values and attitudes
III. Lifelong learning values and attitudes.
Competency area
descriptor Describes at a high level what the competency area is (within the
competency type)

Competency
(short name and
descriptor)
Each competency area has a number of individual competencies
which are described at a high level. These competencies in turn have
a number of learning outcomes used to detail how competence
should be demonstrated.
Competencies define the applied knowledge, skills and professional
values/attitudes that enable professionals to successfully perform
their work while learning objectives are specific to a course of
instruction. Competencies are relevant to an individual's job
responsibilities, roles and capabilities.
An easy definition of competency is that it is something you need to
be able to do well in a specific job role. ... To achieve competence in a
particular job, a person should be able to perform various tasks or apply
knowledge, skills and professional values/attitudes at a target
proficiency level.
Competence is “being able to perform a work role to a defined standard,
with
reference to real working environments”, it is thus “the
demonstrated ability to perform relevant roles or tasks to the
required standard” (IFAC, 2008: IES 8).
Learning outcomes Learning outcomes establish the content and the depth of
knowledge, understanding, and application required for each
competency. Learning outcomes can be achieved within the context
of an academic programme, work environment or a professional
accounting education program.
Learning outcomes are detailed statements which identify what the
prospective CA(SA) should know and be able to do / demonstrate at
the end of the academic and training programmes (and which are
assessed by education providers and training offices)
Proficiency levels Proficiency levels are described differently for each of the
competency types (professional values and attitudes, enabling
competencies and technical competencies).
There are three levels of proficiency defined. The levels demonstrate
progression through the development of competence up to the point of
entry. Level 4 represents an aspirational level of proficiency post
qualification.
The proficiency level expected at point of entry to the profession is set
out in this document. This level of proficiency is achieved by combining
the proficiency levels to be achieved in the academic programme and
the training programme as indicated in the respective guidance
documents.
Universities may elect to include additional content or go beyond
the proficiency levels outlined in the academic guidance
document.
Cyber security Cyber security protects computers, servers, networks, programs
and data from malicious attacks, damage and/or unauthorised
access
Data modelling Data modelling is the analysis of data objects and their relationships to
other data objects
Integrity Acting ethically and honestly; carrying out work with an
objective frame of mind and maintaining independence from
related parties both in fact and appearance
Internet of things
The Internet of Things is a network of interrelated computing devices,
mechanical and/or digital machines, appliances, and other equipment
and objects equipped with computer chips and sensors that enable
them to send and receive data through the Internet

Machine learning Machine learning is a branch of artificial intelligence that provides
systems with the ability to automatically learn and improve from
experience, without being explicitly programmed to do so
Non-specialised
entities
Entities that are not defined as specialised
Organisation
An organisation refers to a group of people that are organised for a
specific purpose such as a company, institution, association or a
professional body. It is used interchangeably with the term entity.
Responsible
Leadership
Leadership encompasses the competencies required to collaborate
with others and inspire teams to achieve organizational goals
Process automation Robotic process automation refers to the use of software with artificial
intelligence and machine learning capabilities to perform high-volume,
repeatable tasks that were previously performed by humans
Six capitals
The six capitals in integrated reporting are: financial, manufactured,
intellectual, human, social and relationship, and natural capital. These
represent the key resources and relationships that organizations rely on
to create value over time
Specialised entities The following entities are considered to be specialised and are excluded
from all professional competencies in this competency framework:
• Agriculture
• Cooperatives
• Collective investments
The following entities are considered to be specialised and are excluded
from technical competencies discussed in sections D and F in this
competency framework:
• Banking and financial institutions
• Insurance companies
• Medical aid funds
• Mineral resources
• Pension funds
• Retirement funds
• Service concessions
Sustainable
development goals
(SDGs)
The scheme to achieve a more sustainable future for all, addressing
global challenges such as those related to poverty, inequality, climate
change, environmental degradation, peace and justice
(https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-development-
goals/)
Values Values are the guiding principles used by a CA in formulating his/her
judgement of what is important in the profession, business and life

Value creation “Value created by an organization over time manifests itself in
increases, decreases or transformations of the capitals caused by the
organization’s business activities and outputs. That value has two
interrelated aspects – value created for:
• The organization itself, which enables financial returns to the
providers of financial capital
• Others (i.e., stakeholders and society at large)” (The
International <IR> Framework 2013:10)
